 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Republic of the Philippines  
Department of Education  
DepEd Complex, Meralco Avenue, Pasig City  
 
 
 
 
    
 
MATATAG CURRICULUM    
 
SCIENCE  
GRADES  4 and 7 
 
 
Page 2 of 38 
 SCIENCE SHAPING PAPER  
I. Introduction  
The Science Shaping Paper is developed to provide the narrative for the development of the recalibrated Science Curriculum. I t outlines 
the goals, theoretical and philosophical foundations, and rationale that shape the Science Curriculum. It presents the b ig ideas and cross -cutting 
concepts in Science to emphasize the development of durable understanding among learners as well as skills applicable in vari ous contexts.  
The Science Shaping Paper and the Science curriculum are based on the General Shaping Paper, taking into consideration the fi ndings of 
the curriculum review conducted in 2019 -2020. Furthermore, the Science curriculum draws on the goals of the 2016 Science K to 12 curriculum. 
Its new features include: (a) expanding technological literacy to technology and engineering literacy to enable learners to d evelop their ability to 
connect science content to real -world technological and engineering applications; (b) i ntroduction of key stage and grade level standards to 
articulate expectations of what learners should be capable of doing at each key stage and grade level; and (c) developmental sequence of content 
in consideration of the prior learning of students and th e cognitive and language demands of learning new science ideas. Specifically, in 
sequencing the science content, three modes of thinking  have been considered, starting from the simplest level when a person reacts to the 
physical environment; is able to int ernalize actions through words and images, and the most complex level; and is already able to think using a 
symbol system such as written language and number systems.  
The recalibration of the Science curriculum draws from and supports the DepEd MATATAG agenda, which sets the new direction in  
resolving basic education challenges through the four critical components:  
• MAking the curriculum relevant to produce competent and job -ready, active, and responsible citizens;  
• TAking steps to accelerate delivery of basic education facilities and services;  
• TAking good care of learners by promoting learner well -being, inclusive education, and a positive learning environment; and  
•  Giving support to teachers to teach better.  
It comes at a time when rapid changes and disruptions are happening. According to Marope, Griffin, and Gallagher (2017), in t he face of 
such persistent and rapid changes, education, through its curricula, should serve as lifelong learning systems, demonstr ating constant self -
renewal and innovation.  
 The succeeding sections are organized as follows:  
▪ The Shape of the Grades 3 to 10 Science Curriculum  
▪ Development of the Curriculum  
o Curriculum Goals, Theoretical and Philosophical Bases, Curriculum Framework, Key Stage Standards, Grade Level Standards  
▪ Elements Contributing to the Curriculum  
Page 3 of 38 
 o Big Ideas, Cross -cutting Concepts, Developmental Sequence of Concepts, Development of 21st Century Skills, Social Issues and 
Government Priorities, STEM, Pedagogies, Assessment, and Resources, Curriculum Organization.  
The Shape of the Grades 3 to 10 Science Curriculum  
The Science curriculum has been developed with the view that science is essential for Filipino learners in an increasingly sc ientific, 
technological, and challenging world.  
Science offers systematic processes and practices to investigate the natural and man -made world and to innovate and to collaborate with 
other people to explore frontiers and challenges, and to look for solutions to real -world problems. It offers a well -established and reliable body of 
knowledge that is increasingly accessible to all and at a range of conceptual levels. Science offers unique ways of thinking and acting in everyday 
social settings, as well as in more technical and professional settings. It of fers ways to exhibit values and attitudes to contribute to an improved 
world.  
The Science curriculum supports Filipino learners to engage with science -related issues, and with the ideas of science, as a reflective 
citizen. It supports them to explain phenomena scientifically, evaluate and design scientific inquiry, and interpret dat a and evidence. It encourages 
and supports them to apply scientific, environmental, technological, and engineering knowledge, practices, and principles in the context of real -
life situations.  
II.        Development of the Curriculum  
A.     Curriculum Goals  
The overall goal of the Grades 3 to 10 Science curriculum is the achievement of scientific, environmental, and technology and engineering 
literacy of all learners.  
On achieving the outcomes of the curriculum, learners will be ready to actively participate in local, national, and global co ntexts and make 
meaningful contributions to a dynamic, culturally diverse, and expanding world. By successfully completing the Scie nce curriculum, Filipino 
learners will demonstrate capabilities as put forth in the Basic Education Development Plan (BEDP) 2030.  
B.     Theoretical and Philosophical Bases  
The Science curriculum presents a modern outlook incorporating learning approaches drawn from an increasingly expanding body of 
worldwide education research and education experience that recommend that science curricula and the teaching and learning of science for the 
elementary and secondary years focus on engaging learners in scientific inquiry and the nature and practice of science.  
Page 4 of 38 
 The Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013 (RA 10533), Section 5.e requires that the curriculum support and reflect universally  recognized 
theories of learning, particularly Constructivism . Other theories contributing to the development of the Science curriculum include Social cognition 
theory, Brain -based theories of learning, and Vygotsky’s Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD).  
The Constructivist theory of learning  suggests that learners learn by expanding their knowledge based on their prior knowledge.  One 
of the primary goals of using constructivist teaching is for learners to learn how to learn when they are trained to take the  initiative for their own 
learning experiences. Therefore, learners learn best when they can construct a personal understanding based on experiencing things and  
reflecting on those experiences. Constructivism emphasizes the active role of learners in bui lding their own understanding. Rather than passively 
receiving information, learners reflect on their experiences, create mental representations, and incorporate new knowledge in to their schemas, 
thus promoting deeper learning and understanding.  
The Social Constructivist Theory  advocated by Vygotsky posits three important ideas on the processes of learning and development of 
an individual. First, these processes involve co -construction with others. Social interaction plays a key role in shaping what learners know 
(cognition). Se cond, language mediates the learning process as they communicate with others, which includes not only verbal but also non -verbal 
communication. Knowledge and concepts are conveyed in the language and modes of communication w e use. And third, learning and development 
take place within cultural and historical contexts. This means that learners' participation in the classroom and in school is  also influenced by 
other institutions in which they participate, such as their home and  community. There is a need to accommodate learners’ diverse backgrounds, 
acknowledging their development as whole persons and tapping into their everyday practices, emotions, and identities . 
Vygotsky’s  Zone of Proximal Development  (ZPD)  refers to the difference between what a learner can do without help and what he or she 
can achieve with guidance and encouragement from a skilled partner. The term ‘proximal’ suggests that area where the learner is ‘close’ to 
grasping the knowledge or skil ls to be learned. It recommends that learning occurs best in the ZPD – the zone where instruction is the most 
beneficial – where the task is only just beyond the individual’s capabilities. An important process: therefore, is for the teacher to iden tify wha t 
the learner already knows and can do so the teacher can provide the ‘close to’ environment. Successful scaffolding thus requi res appropriate 
selections, thoughtful organization, and sensitive presentation of suitable tasks.  
The Science curriculum acknowledges the learners’ direct interaction to their environment through assimilation and reinforcem ent as a 
crucial factor in learning and knowledge acquisition. The Social cognition learning model  suggests that “most human behavior is learned 
observationally through modeling,” thus, learners can learn from observing others either as a live model, a symbolic model, o r a verbal 
instructional model. This pedagogical theory explains as well how attenti on, retention of ideas, reproduct ion of skills, and motivation, are 
influenced by how learners observe others and their experiences as they interact in their social and media environment.  
The Brain -based learning theory  is a relatively new educational theory that puts premium on the recent research about cognitive and 
neurosciences on how the brain learns and how learners learn differently as they age, grow, and mature cognitively, emotional ly, and socially.  It 
strongly  suggests that learning can be improved and accelerated if teachers structure educational experiences in the classroom to refl ect 
conditions that facilitate learning and improve brain functions and health and deliver lessons based on the science of learning.  
Page 5 of 38 
 The Cognitive load theory  is a theory of how human brains process, learn and store information. The theory suggests that working 
memory has a limited capacity and that overloading it reduces the effectiveness of teaching. Furthermore, Dylan William has d escribed cognitive 
load the ory as “the single most important thing for teachers to know” (William 2017). A large body of research evidence indicates tha t instruction 
is most effective when designed according to the limitations of working memory.  
C.    Curriculum  Framework  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Science Curriculum Framework  
A central feature of the Science curriculum is the balanced integration of three interrelated content strands:  
●       Performing scientific inquiry skills;  
●       Understanding and applying scientific knowledge; and  
●       Developing and demonstrating scientific attitudes and values . 

Page 6 of 38 
 This content is structured into a developmental sequence  of science content, which progressively increases in conceptual demand. The 
design supports learners to engage with and learn in science appropriate to the expected prior experiences and learning.  
To support the achievement of the developmental sequence, the Science curriculum has cross -disciplinary opportunities for learning built 
into learning competencies to reinforce the knowledge and understanding, skills and processes, and values and attitudes  content included in the 
domains for a grade level or stage.  
The learning of this content is principally facilitated using the inquiry approach , supported through approaches that challenge learners 
according to their prior learning and needs.  
Participation in scientific inquiry enables students to develop ideas about science and how ideas are developed through scien tific activity. The 
key characteristic of such activity is an attempt to answer a question to which students do not know the answer  or to explain something they do 
not understand. The answer to some questions can be found by first -hand investigation, but for others information is needed from secondary 
sources. Therefore, capabilities involved in conducting scientific inquiry have a ke y role in the development of big ideas.  
From Harlen , W. (Ed.) Working with big ideas of science education ; (2015)  
Other approaches that enhance inquiry learning and have also contributed to the curriculum design include:  
●       applications -led learning,  
●       the science -technology -society approach,  
●       problem -based learning, and  
●       multi -disciplinary learning . 
The Science curriculum adopts in a developmental way the Big Ideas (Harlen, et al. 2015) and Crosscutting Concepts  of Science (A 
Framework for the K -12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas, 2012), as well as integrates government priorities 
identified as appropriate to the science learning area.  
The Science curriculum recognizes the place of science and technology in everyday human affairs. It integrates science and te chnology in 
the social, economic, personal, and ethical aspects of life. The science curriculum promotes strong links between scien ce and technology, 
including indigenous know -how in the use of natural materials, thus contributing to the preservation of the country’s cultural heritage.  
The three areas of knowledge and understanding , skills and processes , and values and attitude  are intertwined within the learning 
competencies in the Science curriculum as these are best learned in context. This reduces the load on the teacher to find mat ching skills, 
processes, and values and attitudes for the concepts to produce authentic activi ties. 
Organizing the curriculum around situations and problems that challenge and activate learners’ curiosity motivates them to en gage and 
appreciate science as relevant and useful.  
Page 7 of 38 
 The intention of the curriculum is not to rely solely on textbooks, but to engage learners in science, as well as technologic al and engineering -
related practices and processes and to incorporate varied hands -on and minds -on activities to develop learners’ interest and encourage them to 
be active learners. Where learning competencies suggest engagement with and demonstrations of knowledge and understanding, th is curriculum 
sets the expectation that learners will actively engage in locating and interpreting t he relevant scientific facts, concepts, laws, and theories, and 
reinterpret or represent them as a deliberate learning strategy. This approach is strongly supported in brain -based learning, which suggests that 
teachers can promote higher learning through g uidance with questions rather than by requiring learners to rote learn.  
The Science curriculum is designed to be learner -centered and inquiry -based, emphasizing the use of evidence in constructing explanations 
and providing opportunities for collaboration, innovation, creative scientific exploration, and engineering design. Th e curriculum explicitly 
presents many learning competencies that require active learner participation and leadership. Thus, teachers should also deli berately look for 
opportunities to apply inquiry learning when addressing any learning competency, as this models the nature and practice of science in authentic 
scientific research and enterprise.  
Assessment is an integral part of teaching and learning. The curriculum is designed to progressively introduce science concep ts and skills 
and build towards learning of more conceptually complex content. For that reason, it is crucial that the prior experi ences, knowledge, and 
understanding of learners are considered and assessed in formative ways to ensure that an accessible but challenging level of  teaching and 
learning is offered to learners, maximizing the effectiveness of instruction (Vygotsky, 1978). Further information about assessment is described 
in the last part of this paper.  
The Science curriculum provides learners with a repertoire of competencies for lifelong learning, for the world of work, and playing part in 
a well -informed society. It envisions learners with scientific, environmental, and technology and engineering liter acy. Learners will be productive 
members of society because they are critical and creative problem solvers, responsible stewards of nature, innovative/inventi ve thinkers, informed 
decision makers, and collaborative and effective communicators.  
The curriculum provides Content standards  for each Domain and Grade to support teachers to identify the level of science knowledge, 
skills, and values to be taught and learned. It also clearly articulates Performance standards  to support the teacher to assess the levels of 
knowledge, skills, and values that learners demonstrate in relation to the Content  and Learning Competencies  addressed during and at the end 
of each quarter of teaching and learning.  
The Science curriculum is structured using the following organizers:  
●       Content  – signaling the key areas of focus for a Quarter;  
●      Content Standards  – indicating the conceptual level expected for the Quarter;  
●       Learning Competencies  – identifying the specific aspects of content for learners to achieve;  
●      Performance Standards  – providing a level for teachers to use to judge learner achievement at the end of each quarter; and  
●       Performance Tasks  – samples of tasks where the learner applies their knowledge, understanding, skills and processes, values and 
attitudes, through which teachers can judge the levels of achievement of the performance standard for each quarter in the dom ain. 
Page 8 of 38 
   
IV. Elements Contributing to the Science Curriculum  
A.   Big Ideas  
The concepts and skills of Science are not taught in isolation, but rather in the context of big ideas in Science with increa sing levels of 
complexity from one grade level to another in developmental progression, thus paving the way to a deeper understandi ng of core concepts. The 
integration across science domains leads to a meaningful understanding of interrelated concepts and their applications in rea l-life situations.  
One of the reported findings from the curriculum review is that the curriculum is congested – that there is an unequal distribution of 
learning competencies across different cognitive demands and grade levels. Specifically, there are many learning competen cies on the cognitive 
demands communicating understanding of science concepts and analyzing information and advance scientific arguments. To addres s this issue, 
the learning standards are redesigned with a focus on the Big Ideas, and the content standards are progressively appropriate for each grade level. 
Additionally, the learning competencies ensure a comparable distribution of cognitive demands across different cognitive doma ins and grade 
levels, for the learners to learn to perform basic procedures bef ore undertaking the more cognitively demanding competencies.  
A Big Idea  is a statement of an idea that is central to learning – one that links numerous understandings into a coherent whole. It also 
represents a progression towards understanding key concepts in different learning areas (Charles, 2005). Grounding the learne r’s content 
knowledge on a relatively few Big Ideas establishes a robust understanding of the learning area. The connection of Big Ideas to many other ideas 
allows the learner to see it as a set of interrelated concepts, skills, and facts thus, promo ting memory and enhancing transfer.  
B.   Crosscutting Science Concepts  
Crosscutting concepts are described as “dimensions that unify the study of science and engineering through their common appli cation 
across fields.” ( A Framework for K -12 Science Education Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas, National Academy of Sciences, 2012)  
Research suggests that learners, over multiple years of school, actively engage in science and engineering practices and appl y crosscutting 
concepts to deepen their understanding of each field’s disciplinary core ideas.  
The Science curriculum recognizes the importance of utilizing internationally accepted crosscutting ideas that recur across t he different 
science domains and across grade levels. These crosscutting concepts include the following:  
●       Structure and function,  
●       Stability and change,  
●       Systems and system models,  
●       Energy and matter: flows, cycles, and conservation,  
Page 9 of 38 
 ●       Scale, proportion and measurement,  
●       Patterns,  
●       Cause and effect,  and 
●       The nature and practices of Science . 
Crosscutting concepts connect the small ideas in the different science domains as the learning areas are introduced in every quarter.  
C.    The Developmental Sequence of Concepts  
The Science curriculum has been structured to progressively develop conceptual understanding of science ideas and practices b y carefully 
paying attention to the introduction of new ideas. It is cognizant of the following important factors that influence st udents’ readiness to learn 
science ideas and practices:  
1. The experiences and expected prior learning of students;  
2. The stages of development of students as described in educational research (that learners progress through modes of thinking  from 
birth to adulthood: from sensorimotor  to iconic to concrete symbolic , to formal  and finally to post-formal .); 
3. The cognitive demand of new science ideas for learners;  
4. The language demands associated with new ideas in science; and  
5. The need to reinforce new ideas within and across science domains in a consistent manner.  
The Science curriculum for Grades 3 to 10 particularly responds to the first three modes of thinking  to inform the sequencing of science 
content. The  Sensori -motor  mode identifies the developmental stage when a person reacts to the physical environment. For the very young child, 
it is the mode in which motor skills are acquired. In adult life, this mode is utilized as skills associated with sports and other physical  activities 
that develop and evolve. The Iconic  mode identifies when a person can internalize actions in the form of images. It is in this mode that the young 
child develops words and images that represent objects and events. For the adult, this mode of fu nctioning assists in the appreciation of art and 
music and leads to a form of knowledge referred to as intuitive. The Concrete symbolic  mode identifies when a person thinks using a symbol 
system such as written language and number systems. Thinking in this mode is reliant on a ‘real -world’ referent. This is the most common mode 
addressed in learning in the upper primary and secondary scho ol (Biggs & Collis, 1982).  
The design of the Science curriculum promotes interactive, concrete and hands -on instructional approaches in the early grades, especially 
in the introduction of more difficult concepts. The delivery of a lesson will call for activating prior knowledge in w hich new learning is built over 
prior learning. The presentation of content follows a progression from Grade 3 to Grade 10 towards scientific, environmental,  and technology and 
engineering literacy of all learners.  
a.    Vertical Articulation  
Page 10 of 38 
 The various concepts, processes, and skills in the four domains of the Science curriculum are arranged in an increasing level  of complexity 
from Grade 3 to Grade 10. It reinforces new ideas through the use of the development of key ideas towards the big id eas as described by Harlen, 
et al., (2015), and this learning is reinforced by integrating the crosscutting concepts of science developmentally through t he various domains.  
The progression of concepts across grade levels provides opportunity for the development of understanding of key science conc epts. This 
is fundamental to the process whereby learners construct their understanding and skills. Since science is taught as a se parate learning area 
from Grade 3, the learning standards leading to the acquisition of good health habits and development of curiosity about self  and the environment 
using basic process skills in Grades 1 and 2 are articulated in other learning areas.  
b.    Horizontal Articulation  
The learning of science is interconnected with other learning areas especially languages and mathematics. The foundational sk ills, 
especially literacy and numeracy, introduced in the other learning areas are paramount to the understanding and acquisition o f concepts and 
skills in science. These basic skills, together with the other essential skills, such as communication, collaboration, and cr itical thinking, ensure 
not only the learning of science content but also address and establish connections and appl ications in other learning areas. Linking science 
with literacy and numeracy is vital to fill in the gaps where the learners' knowledge and skills may be inadequate.  
The curriculum also makes use of the interconnection between science and the other learning areas such as Edukasyong Pantahan an at 
Pangkabuhayan/Technology Livelihood Education (EPP/TLE), Araling Panlipunan (AP), the language subjects, and Mathematics, amo ng others. 
Analysis of factors affecting the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) performance of Filipino learners has sh own that the 
development of problem solving, critical thinking, and information literacy in subject areas such as Aralin g Panlipunan, English, and Filipino is 
related to the development of the same set of 21st century skills in Science.  
D.    Development of the 21st Century Skills  
One of the daunting challenges of 21st century education is to respond to the needs and demands of this fast -paced dynamic world. 
Accelerated digitalization and artificial intelligence, shifting job market demands, information explosion, pressures of glob al competitiveness, and 
transforming sc ientific innovations and technological advancements redefine the knowledge, skill and competency sets that the next generatio n 
of learners must be equipped with to be adequately prepared.  
The Department of Education (DepEd) recognizes and responds to these needs and demands through appropriate changes in the 
educational system. DepEd also continues to respond to the challenges through the refinement of the K to 12 curricula to prod uce holis tically 
developed Filipino learners with essential 21st century knowledge and skills needed to participate in and provide significant contributions to the 
society and to nation -building.  
21st Century Skills are the knowledge, skills, attitudes, and competencies that learners need to develop so that they can prepare for and 
succeed in work and life in the 21st century (DepEd Order No. 21, s. 2019). It also refers to the knowledge, skills and attitudes necessary to be 
Page 11 of 38 
 competitive in the 21st century workforce, participate appropriately in an increasingly diverse society, use new technologies and cope with rapidly 
changing workplaces (Binkley et al.  2012; Scoular and Care, 2018). These skills are transversal in nature and work in conjunction with 
foundational literacy and numeracy skills and discipline -specific competencies (e.g., scientific literacy).  
       Every K to 12 graduate is expected to be equipped with 21st Century Skills which include the following:  
(a) Information, Media and Technology skills – the ability to gather, manage, evaluate, use, and synthesize information through media and 
technology. These skills allow learners to navigate a fluid and dynamic environment of knowledge creation and acquisit ion. Among the skills and 
competencies that the science curriculum emphasizes include Visual, Information, Technology,  and Digital literacies . 
(b) Learning and Innovation skills – the ability to think critically, analyze and solve problems, create  and implement innovations, and 
generate functional knowledge. The science curriculum highlights Creativity, Openness, Critical thinking, Problem -solving, and Reflective thinking.  
(c) Life and Career skills – prepares learners to make informed life and career decisions to enable them to become citizens that engage in 
a dynamic global community and to successfully adapt to meet the challenges and opportunities to lead in the global w orkforce.  The science 
curriculum helps develop Informed decision -making, Self -discipline, Future orientation, and Resilience and adversity management . 
(d) Communication skills – the ability to express oneself clearly and collaborate with others. The science curriculum puts premium on 
communication skills including all forms and context including but not limited to verbal and non -verbal, active listening,  as well as the abilities 
to express feelings and provide feedback. The science curriculum focuses on the development of the sub -skills: Teamwork, Collaboration, 
Intrapersonal skills, Interactive communication, and Communicating in a diverse environment.  
E.   Social Issues and Government Priorities  
The Science curriculum contributes to the achievement of government priorities to address current social issues by integratin g developing 
learners’ awareness in relation to those aspects of the content that are most applicable and provide authentic signifi cance for learners. The 
common goal is achieved by bringing relevant issues and applications to curriculum learning contexts in science to support le arners to develop 
their understanding, skills, and values and attitudes towards becoming responsible and pr oductive citizens.  
Science, as a discipline, puts premium on the investigation of natural phenomena and as such addresses and contributes to the  goals of 
the many government priorities, which include the following:  
●       Reduction and management of risks and disaster;  
●       Fighting against climate change;  
●       Environmental protection and conservation;  
●   Sustainable development of resources and energy, including the Green economy, Renewable energy, Sustainable mining; and  
●       Comprehensive Sexuality Education (CSE).  
Page 12 of 38 
 F.   STEM  
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) is a government priority and is significant in the development of pro blem 
solvers, innovative thinkers, and entrepreneurs who can contribute to inclusive economic development. As depicted in the STEM  Framework, 
this development is achieved through three learning areas in the K to 12 curriculum – Science, Mathematics, and Technology and Livelihood 
Education (TLE), which may collectively employ the Engineering Design Process (EDP) to attain curriculum go als. Though distinct and taught 
separately, these three learning areas are interrelated, and each contributes knowledge and skills for the solution to real -world problems. Figure 
2 shows a diagrammatic representation of the STEM Framework . 
 
Figure 2. STEM Framework  
Utilizing the EDP in the instruction allows learners to design solutions based on understanding the needs and contexts, build and test 
solutions, repeat steps as many times as needed to make improvements, learn from unsuccessful attempts, and discover differen t or novel design 
possibilities to arrive at optimal soluti ons. In the curriculum, EDP is exhibited through problem solving and investigative approaches where 
learners apply their mathematical, scientific, and technological understanding to formulate, conjecture, reason, create, and evaluate.  
G.    Pedagogies, Assessment, and Resources  
The Science Curriculum Framework identifies the pedagogies that the curriculum embraces to improve learning in science for Fi lipino 
learners.  These pedagogical approaches can be included appropriately by teachers in the delivery of science lessons to adap t to the learners’ 
context and learning environment. These approaches are described below to guide teachers in using each pedagogical approach.  

Page 13 of 38 
 Inquiry -based learning  approach puts a premium on questioning, investigating, proving, probing, explaining, predicting, and establishing 
connections of evidence (Calburn, 2020). Instead of a transmissive mode of teaching, this approach involves inquiry and susta ined active 
engag ement of learners. The approach is characterized in the classroom by questions and discussions. Inquiry allows learners to fo rmulate 
questions and find solutions through learning real -life-based investigations and research projects. Concepts and specific scientific terms need to 
be explained in simple language. Applications and situations need to be explained in relevant contexts and are best explored through science 
activities. In this approach learners also engage in developing proc ess skills, analyzing and evaluating evidence, experiencing and discussing, 
and talking to their peers about their own understanding (Suchman, 1964). Learners collaborate with others to make discoverie s, solve problems, 
and plan investigations.  
An applications -led approach  suggests that it is useful to consider the application of the concept rather than of an approach based on 
the traditional logic of the discipline. Applications -led approach means that the science to be taught is determined by applications from life and 
NOT by the logic of the discipline of science. Although this curriculum does not suggest an applications -led approach for the entire curriculum, 
the inclusion in each quarter in each of the domains of learning of suggested Perform ance Tasks is intended to reflect the importance given to 
the expectation that the learners demonstrate how their learning can be applied to their everyday lives.  
The Science Technology Society approach (STS) focuses on the societal role of science and technology in the contemporary and modern 
world. It provides a dynamic and interdisciplinary relationship of history, philosophy and sociology including cultural persp ectives to answer and 
respond to current scie nce concerns, issues and problems (Pritchard & Woollard, 2010). By using this approach, the learners expand their 
understanding of science across disciplines and holistically view problems by examining the cons equences of science and technology.  
Problem -based Learning approach (PBL)  is the acquisition of knowledge and skills using critical thinking and creativity to solve real -life 
problems. In this approach, real -world problems motivate learners to seek out deeper understanding of concepts, design reasoned decisions and 
defend them,  and collaborate among themselves (Duch et al., 2001). Through this approach, development of critical thinking, problem -solving 
abilities, and collaboration and communication skills, are essentially given a focus. An ef fective and versatile approach for PBL is design thinking 
or engineering design process, which can be used to generate solutions based on the needs of intended users.  
A multidisciplinary  (cross -disciplinary) design is built into the Science curriculum. A multidisciplinary approach is defined by UNESCO 
as “curriculum integration which focuses primarily on the different disciplines and the diverse perspectives they bring to illust rate a topic, theme or 
issue. A multidisciplinary curriculum is one in which the same topic is studied from the viewpoint of more t han one discipline .” The Science 
curriculum lends itself to greater integration of disciplines as may be adopted in some schools. Similarly, UNESCO defines a transdisciplinary 
approach  as “an approach to curriculum integration which dissolves the boundaries between the conventional disciplines and organizes teach ing 
and learning around the construction of meaning in the context of real -world problems or themes. ” An interdisciplinary approach  is defined as 
“An approach to curriculum integration that generates an understanding of themes and ideas that cut across disciplines and of the connections 
between different discipli nes and their relationship to the real world. It normally emphasizes process and meaning rather than product and content 
by combining contents, theories, methodologies, and perspectives from two or more disciplines.”  
Page 14 of 38 
 Assessment for the Science Curriculum  
1. Classroom Assessment  is an ongoing process of identifying, gathering, organizing, and interpreting quantitative and qualitative information 
about what learners know and can do (DepEd Order 31, s. 2020).  
The alignment of assessment to curriculum and pedagogy ensures that assessments are fair, valid and reliable in judging, prov iding 
feedback, and adjusting for the cognitive progress of the learners. Appropriate assessment shall be employed to holistically measure the learners’ 
current and developing abilities while developing personal accountability in the process  (DepEd Order 8, s. 2015).  
Assessment for the Science curriculum should be organized to:  
●       identify prior learning and to set goals for learning;  
●  support  learners explicitly to take an active role in assessing and evaluating their learning; and  
●  judge the level of achievement of the learners against the content, performance and grade standards of the intended learning.  
As instruction for the Science curriculum is expected to be inquiry -based, it is critical that before addressing the learning competencies 
for that quarter the teacher identifies what the learners already know and can do. This may or may not be through for mal assessment tasks but 
should provide the information needed to properly plan learning activities for individual learners and the class overall. The se types of assessment 
may be used any time during inquiry -based science instruction to check on understan ding of scientific concepts, verify the development of 
scientific inquiry, and reiterate the Science process skills. Assessment to check on learners' learning also provides a proce ss to provide feedback 
and adapt to the needs of the learner, thus allowing the teacher to adjust instruction to meet learners' ever -changing needs.  
  
2. Performance Tasks and Standards  
The Science curriculum requires learners to complete at least one substantial performance task for each quarter. These may be  through 
independent or collaborative work. The curriculum provides Performance Standards along with sample tasks to guide teachers  on the 
performance level expected. The levels of learner performance are judged using criteria suitable for the task.  
The Performance standards, which are closely aligned with the Content Standards, provide a mechanism for teachers to make jud gements 
on how well learners are applying science knowledge and understanding, skills and processes, and values and attitudes descr ibed in the 
curriculum content.  
Performance Tasks and Standards assist the teachers and learners to answer the questions:  
1. “What do learners do with what they know?”  
2. “How well do learners demonstrate their learning?”  
3. “How well do learners apply their learning in different situations, including in real -life contexts?”  
Page 15 of 38 
 4. “What tools and measures and values do learners use or draw on to demonstrate what they know?”  
Resources and Technologies  
The implementation of the Science curriculum can be delivered across available learning delivery resources. The teaching and learning 
process is not limited to face -to-face. The curriculum allows the adoption of a distance or blended learning approach. Tea chers may need to 
change their usual practice of instruction – they would have to be familiar with the pedagogical and technological demands of these new learning 
approaches.  
There are several innovative teaching methods and technological tools that should be introduced appropriately in basic scienc e education. 
These emerging methodologies, strategies and tools should be appropriately chosen, and integrated into the science les sons to fit learners’ 
cognitive abilities and classroom contexts. Among these innovative teaching methods and tools which can be applied to science  are design 
thinking and engineering design processes, robotics technology, mobile learning applications, lea rning analytics, games and gamification, and 
virtual and remote laboratories.  Teaching methods and strategies should cater to the needs, skills and contexts of diverse l earners. The 
Department of Education will continually assess and evaluate the applicab ility of these emerging approaches.  
H.    Curriculum Organization  
The Science curriculum is organized into discipline -oriented domains . 
The domains for Grades 3 -6 are:  
●       Materials  
●       Force, Motion, and Energy  
●       Living things; and  
●       Earth and space.  The domains for Grades 7 -10 are:  
●       Science of Materials  
●       Force, Motion, and Energy  
●       Life Science; and  
●       Earth and Space Science.  
  
The learning competencies in the Science curriculum are written as statements of what learners know and can do. They signal learning 
activities that require active learner participation using an inquiry approach to deliver deep learning.  
Teachers are encouraged to develop learning activities and opportunities that progressively build conceptual understanding, s kills, values 
and attitudes within domain quarters by considering the learning competencies holistically, rather than as a list of things/content to cover.  
Over a grade, teachers are encouraged to develop learning activities and opportunities that connect with and draw on content from other 
domain quarters.  
Page 16 of 38 
 The science curriculum provides cross -domain alignment of significant science knowledge, skills, processes and attitude -related contexts 
and competencies to allow learners to apply and reinforce learning in varying contexts throughout each year and key sta ge. 
 
LEARNING AREA STANDARDS  
Science Curriculum Overview  
The Science curriculum provides learners with a repertoire of competencies important for lifelong learning and in the world o f work in a 
skill-based society. It envisions the development of scientifically , environmentally , and technology  literate  learners  who are productive 
members of society and who are critical problem solvers , responsible stewards of nature , innovative and creative citizens , informed decision makers , 
and collaborative and effective communicators . 
A central feature of the Science curriculum is the balanced integration of three interrelated content strands:  
·        Performing scientific inquiry skills,  
·        Understanding and applying scientific knowledge, and  
·        Developing and demonstrating scientific attitudes and values . 
It is designed and organized through the integration of the three interrelated content strands. The acquisition of these cont ent strands is 
facilitated by drawing from the key pedagogical approaches: inquiry -based learning, applications -led approach, the science -technology -
society approach, problem -based learning, and multi -disciplinary learning. The approaches are based on sound and valued educational 
research and concepts including Constructivism , the Social Cognition Learning Model , Brain -based Learning  and Vygotsky’s Zone of proximal 
development . 
The Science curriculum explicitly adapts in a developmental way Big Ideas  (Harlen, et al., 2015) and Cross Cutting Concepts of Science 
(A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas, 2012), and integrates governmental thrusts of the 
Philippines identified as appropriate to the science learning area. The science curriculum recognizes the place of science and technology in 
everyday human affairs. It integrates science and technology in the social, economic, personal,  and ethical aspects of life. The science curriculum 
promotes a strong link between science and technology, including indigenous technology, thus preserving our country’s cultura l heritage.  
Science concepts and science processes are intertwined through the learning competencies in the Science G3 to G10 curriculum.  A learner -
centered and inquiry -based approach facilitates the acquisition of science concepts. Organizing the curriculum around si tuations and problems 
that challenge and stir up learners’ curiosity motivates them to learn and appreciate science as relevant and useful. Rather than relying solely 
on textbooks, a variety of hands -on, minds -on, and hearts -on activities are advocated to develop learners’ interest and lead them to becoming 
active learners to acquire deep knowledge for applying 21st Century Skills.  
Page 17 of 38 
 The Science curriculum emphasizes the use of evidence in constructing explanations and providing opportunities for collaborat ion, 
innovation, creative scientific exploration, and engineering design.  
Concepts and skills in the learning domains are not taught in isolation, but rather in the context of important ideas in Scie nce with 
increasing levels of complexity from one grade level to another in developmental progression, thus paving the way to a dee per understanding of 
core concepts. The integration across science topics and other disciplines will lead to a meaningful understanding of interre lated concepts and 
their applications in real -life situations.  
Assessment is an integral part of teaching and learning. The curriculum is designed to progressively introduce science concep ts and skills 
and build towards learning of more conceptually complex content. For that reason, it is crucial that the prior experi ences, knowledge and 
understanding of learners are considered and assessed in formative ways. Doing so ensures that an accessible and engaging lev el of teaching 
and learning is offered to learners, hence maximizing the effectiveness of instruction (Vygotsk y, 1978). Regular monitoring will ensure 
effectiveness of the implementation of the Science curriculum and its responsiveness to the needs of the learner and the dema nds of the highly 
globalized community.  
 
I.  Key Stage Standards  
Key Stage 1 Standard  
At the end of Grade 3, the learners acquire healthy habits and curiosity about self and their environment using basic process  skills of 
observing, communicating, comparing, classifying, measuring, inferring, and predicting. This curiosity will help learner s value science as an 
important tool in helping them continue to explore their natural and physical environment. This also includes developing scie ntific knowledge or 
concepts.  
The specific objectives of Key Stage 1 are to ensure that the learners:  
a.  understand the properties of objects around them;  
b.  describe the basic needs of living things;  
c. demonstrate and practice basic science process skills to investigate scientifically; and  
d.  exhibit curiosity and appreciation of the natural world.  
Key Stage 2 Standard  
At the end of Grade 6, the learners have the essential skills of scientific inquiry – designing simple investigations, using appropriate 
procedures and tools to gather evidence, observing patterns, determining relationships, drawing conclusions based on ev idence, and 
communicating ideas in varied ways to make meaning of the observations and/or changes that occur in the environment. The cont ent and skills 
learned will be applied to maintain good health, ensure the protection and improvement of the environmen t, and practice safety measures in 
daily activities.  
Page 18 of 38 
 The specific objectives of Key Stage 2 are to ensure that the learners:  
a. acquire knowledge and skills necessary to explain natural phenomena;  
b. understand and recall science concepts and connect them with new information;  
c. conduct investigations safely using appropriate equipment; and  
d.  communicate scientific observations and ideas accurately.  
Key Stage 3 Standard  
At the end of Grade 10, the learners demonstrate scientific, environmental, and technological and engineering literacies that  would lead 
to rational choices on issues confronting them. Having been exposed to scientific investigations related to real life, they recognize that the central 
feature of an investigation is that if one variable is changed, the effect of the change on another variable can be measured.  The contexts of 
investigations can be problems at the local or national levels, and can encourage learners to communicate their findings to other people. The 
learners demonstrate understanding of science concepts and apply science inquiry skills in addressing real -world problems through scientific 
investigations.  
The specific objectives of Key Stage 3 are to ensure that the learners:  
a. apply science concepts in designing scientific investigations and/or possible solutions to real -world problems;  
b. evaluate scientific evidence in drawing interpretations and conclusions;  
c.  exhibit critical and analytical thinking in making decisions in scientific contexts; and  
d. demonstrate desirable attitudes and skills in conducting scientific investigations.  
II. Grade Level Standards  
Kindergarten – Grade 2  
The grade level standards for Kindergarten, Grade 1, and Grade 2 form part of other curricula, including the English curricul um and the 
Mathematics curriculum. The content, including learning competencies for these grades, is not included in the Science cu rriculum; however, the 
content of other curricula has been used to develop the Science curriculum. The use of the Science curriculum should be built  on and incorporate 
the content of other curricula especially in use with Grade 3 learners, where understand ing of expected prior learning is essential.  
Grade 3  
At the end of Grade 3, learners demonstrate simple science process skills of observing, predicting, and measuring to explore com mon local 
materials, their physical properties, and how they have been used over hundreds of years. They locate and describe non -living things that produce 
useful materials. They observe, describe, and measure living and non -living things in their local environment. They describe the basic needs of 
living things and explain how their body parts allow them to carry out their daily acti vities. They recognize the need to protect the environment 
to ensure that the basic needs of living things can be met.  
Page 19 of 38 
 Learners use everyday language to explore, describe, and make suggestions about the simple movements of objects. They learn t hrough 
guided activities to make safe and careful observations of natural objects in the sky and demonstrate scientific ways of rec ording observations to 
reveal patterns in nature. Learners identify and explore sources of light and sound in their local environment and suggest ho w to use them safely 
in their lives. They apply their curiosity in the world around them and their creativit y to propose solutions to simple challenges. Learners 
demonstrate safe handling procedures in using equipment and materials.  
Grade 4  
At the end of Grade 4, learners describe chemical properties of materials and that changes to them are sometimes harmful. The y identify 
that plants and animals have systems whose function is to keep them alive. They observe, describe, and create representa tions to show how 
living things interact with their habitat, survive, and reproduce. They use diagrams to show the feeding relationship among d ifferent organisms.  
Learners use simple equipment to identify types of soil that hold water and support plant growth. Learners use simple equipme nt and 
processes to measure and record data about movement, and describe and predict how things around them move. They describe the  concepts of 
speed and force. They recognize that science processes are used to gain deeper understanding about the properties of magnets,  light, sound, and 
heat. Learners apply their developing observation skills and objectivity to identify where energy i s evident in their local communities and how it 
is used by people. They use instruments and secondary sources to measure and describe the characteristics of weather and use the information 
to make predictions. Learners demonstrate appreciation for the dang ers of extreme weather events and use safe practice to protect themselves. 
Learners use personal observations and reliable secondary information sources to describe the sun and explain its importance to life on Earth. 
They exhibit objectivity and open -mind edness in gathering information related to environmental issues and concerns in the community.  
Grade 5  
At the end of Grade 5, learners identify matter as having mass and taking up space and existing in three states based on the properties of 
shape and volume. They identify that heat is involved in changes of state. They plan and carry out a simple scientifi c investigation following 
appropriate steps and identifying appropriate equipment. Learners describe and create models of the body systems that represe nt how humans 
grow, develop, and reproduce. They use tables to group living things as plants, animals, or  microorganisms. They use skills of observing, 
predicting, measuring, and recording to plan and carry out a simple activity to compare the life cycles of plants and animals . They plan and carry 
out valid and reliable scientific investigations to explore fr ictional forces by identifying and controlling variables. They observe and describe basic 
features of static electricity and electric current and explain and recognize applications of forces and electrical energy in  the home and community.  
Learners explain the role of the water cycle in changing landforms and earth materials. They explain the causes and impacts o f extreme 
weather and identify appropriate and safe ways to respond to such events. They recognize the scale of space and describe the features of the 
solar system. They use models to communicate significant relationships and movements. They demonstrate curiosity and creativi ty in 
communicating information about earth processes to other people. Learners use objectivity and measurement  to carry out scientific investigations 
Page 20 of 38 
 using fair tests and multiple trials to explore how forces influence the movement of familiar objects and predict how gravity  affects objects on 
Earth.  
Grade 6  
At the end of Grade 6, learners describe the benefits of various separation techniques and demonstrate skills through the use  of equipment. 
They use diagrams and flowcharts to describe changes of state. They use the words reversible and irreversible to des cribe changes to materials. 
They identify mixtures such as solutions and give examples such as mixture. They recognize and apply their understanding of t he features of a 
fair test. Learners describe the different ways that plants reproduce and plan a simpl e scientific investigation to determine which method works 
best in a given habitat. They describe that vertebrates are animals with a backbone and that invertebrates do not have a back bone. They design 
and produce an example of a food web that identifies t he role of consumers, producers, scavengers, and decomposers. They identify the technical 
terms biotic and abiotic as referring to living and non -living things.  
Learners carry out investigations to observe patterns and systems scientifically. They support their observations and conclus ions to explain 
occurrences and concepts using technical scientific language. They use critical thinking skills and creativity to m ake models and other devices 
to communicate their understanding to other people.  
Learners describe that volcanoes can have unexpected and severe impacts on communities and that the uncertainty and impacts o f 
unpredicted eruptions can be offset by understanding and following alerts from authorities. Learners explain that the weather  patterns that 
produce seasons are largely predictable, and use models to explain natural processes and timing, such as the changes of seaso n. Learners 
identify that scientific models are valuable in explaining other observations of patterns in nature, such as  the apparent movement of celestial 
objects across the sky. They exhibit respect for cultures and interpretations of natural phenomena by indigenous people over generations and 
respect explanations of phenomena using scientific inquiry and objectivity.  
Grade 7  
At the end of Grade 7, learners use models to describe the Particle theory of matter. They use diagrams and illustrations to explain the 
motion and arrangement of particles during changes of state. They explain the role of solute and solvent in solutions a nd the factors that affect 
solubility. They demonstrate skills to plan and conduct a scientific investigation making accurate measurements and using sta ndard units. 
Learners describe the parts and function of a compound microscope and use this to identify cell structure. They describe the cell as the basic 
unit of life and that some organisms are unicellular and some multicellular. They explain that there are two types of cell di vision, and that 
reproduction can occur through sexual or asexual processes. Th ey use diagrams to make connections between organisms and their environment 
at various levels of organization. They explain the process of energy transfer through trophic levels in food chains.  
Learners use systems to analyze and explain natural phenomena and explain the dynamics of faults and earthquakes. They identi fy and 
assess the earthquake risks for their local communities using authentic and reliable secondary data. They use national and l ocal disaster 
Page 21 of 38 
 awareness and risk reduction management plans to identify and explain to others what to do in the event of an earthquake and/ or tsunami. 
Learners explain the cause and effects of secondary impacts that some coastal communities may experience should a tsuna mi be produced by 
either a local or distant earthquake. Learners identify and explain how Solar energy influences the atmosphere and weather sy stems of the Earth 
and that these are the dominant processes that influence the climate of the country.  
Learners employ scientific techniques, concepts, and models to investigate forces and motion, and describe their findings usi ng scientific 
language, force diagrams, and distance -time graphs. They use their curiosity, knowledge and understanding, and skills  to propose solutions to 
problems related to motion and energy. They use scientific investigations to describe the properties of heat energy.  They ap ply their knowledge 
and problem -solving skills in everyday situations and explore how modern technologies may be used to overcome current global energy concerns.  
Grade 8  
At the end of Grade 8, learners apply knowledge and understanding of acceleration to everyday situations involving motion. Th ey represent 
and interpret acceleration in distance -time, and velocity -time graphs to make predictions about the movement of object s. Learners link motion 
to kinetic energy and potential energy and explain transformations between them using everyday examples. Learners relate unde rstanding of 
kinetic energy and potential energy to an appreciation of the hydroelectric resources of the c ountry which generates electricity for use in homes, 
communities, and industries. They use scientific investigations to explore the properties of light and apply their learning t o solving problems in 
everyday situations. Learners use models, flow charts, a nd diagrams to explain how body systems work together for the growth and survival of 
an organism. They represent patterns of inheritance and predict simple ratios of offspring. They explain that the classificat ion of living things 
shows the diversity and t he unity of living things. They describe the processes of respiration and photosynthesis, and plan and record a scientific 
investigation to verify the raw materials needed. They use flow charts and diagrams to explain the cycles in nature.  
Learners describe the large -scale features of the ‘blue planet’ Earth and relate those features to the geological characteristics of the upper 
crustal layers of the Earth. They identify and describe the nature and impact of volcanic activity in building ne w crust and identify that these 
crust forming processes account for patterns and changes in the distribution of volcanoes, earthquakes, and mountain chains t hat have occurred 
over time. Learners identify the relationships between landforms and oceans to ex plain the formation and impacts of typhoons. Learners describe 
the structure of the atom and how our understandings have changed over time. They draw models of the atom and use tables to i dentify the 
properties of subatomic particles. They explain that ele ments and compounds are pure substances. They identify elements, their symbols, their 
valence electrons, their positions in groups and periods on the periodic table. They design and/or create timelines or docume ntaries as interesting 
learning tools.  
Grade 9  
At the end of Grade 9, learners describe that the transmission of traits is determined by DNA, genes, and chromosomes and exp lain that 
high levels of diversity help to maintain stability of an ecosystem. They identify critically endangered plants and anima ls of the Philippines and 
strategies to protect and conserve them.  They describe features of typical Philippine ecosystems and conduct a survey to exp lore possibilities to 
Page 22 of 38 
 minimize the impact of human activities. Learners carry out a valid and reliable scientific investigation, showing the format ion of a new substance. 
They demonstrate an understanding of the significance of valence and identify bonds as ionic, covalent, or metallic. They recognize the symbols 
of common elements and the formula for common compounds.  They describe the properties of ionic, covalent, and metallic subst ances. They 
demonstrate critical and creative thinking in producing a learning tool about the role of bonds.  
Learners exhibit skills in gathering information from secondary sources and identify the location and geological setting of t he Philippines 
to explain its unique landforms and dynamic geologic activity in a global context. They recognize the size and scale  of the Earth and describe 
evidence for a dynamic Earth. Learners demonstrate curiosity and open -mindedness to evaluate theories of the formation of the Solar System. 
They describe modern scientific processes and technologies used by scientists to investig ate the nature and evolution of the Solar System. 
Learners demonstrate a practical understanding of Newton’s three laws of motion and explain everyday application of Newton’s laws. Learners 
explain the features of electricity and electrical circuitry in ho mes. Learners gather information from secondary sources to describe the nature 
and features of frequencies across the electromagnetic spectrum and identify practical applications and detrimental effects t hat electromagnetic 
radiation can have on living thi ngs. 
Grade 10  
At the end of Grade 10, learners describe and explain the geologically dynamic nature of the Philippine archipelago in relati on to its plate 
tectonic setting, and use models to explain the earth structures, movements, and natural events that occur. They explain mech anisms that have 
contributed to the current distributions of continents and make predictions about changes that can be ex pected in the future.  Learners describe 
rapid changes that are occurring in local and global climate patterns and propose solutions to address these changes. Learner s describe 
qualitatively the factors that affect the trajectory of projectiles. They disti nguish different types of collisions and describe the impacts on the 
motion of objects. They carry out investigations using models to identify relationships that affect the motion of objects and  apply their 
understanding to real -life situations. Learners g ather information from secondary sources to identify, describe, and explain how science impacts 
human activities and the environment.  
Learners explain that there are different indicators for classifying substances as acids, bases, or salts. They describe the identifying factors 
for a chemical reaction as well as the important types of chemical reactions. They explain how some important c hemical reactions impact the 
natural and built environments. They write balanced chemical equations using formula and apply the principles of conservation  of mass. They 
explain factors that affect the rate of a reaction and that some reactions are exotherm ic, and others are endothermic. They demonstrate the 
knowledge and the skills needed to plan and conduct valid and reliable scientific investigations and record them appropriatel y. Learners describe 
homeostasis as a process that allows an organism to maint ain stability. They describe and discuss that natural selection is the driving mechanism 
of evolutionary change. They explain the meaning of the term biotechnology and debate the societal, environmental, and ethica l implications of 
utilizing biotechnologic al products and methods. They discuss the factors that limit the ecosystem’s carrying capacity and the role of population 
growth.  
Page 23 of 38 
 For the operational purposes of curriculum implementation in schools, the four domains in the Science curriculum have been as signed in 
quarters as shown below, with Grades 3 to 6 in the elementary school and Grades 7 to 10 in the junior high school.  
 
 
SEQUENCE OF DOMAIN PER QUARTER  
  Elementary  Junior High School  
Grade 3  Grade 4  Grade 5  Grade 6  Grade 7  Grade 8  Grade 9  Grade 10  
First 
Quarter  Materials  Materials  Materials  Materials  Science of 
Material s Life Science  Force, Motion, 
and Energy  Earth and 
Space Science  
Second 
Quarter  Living Things  Living Things  Living Things  Living Things  Life Science  Science of 
Material s Earth and 
Space Science  Force, Motion, 
and Energy  
Third 
Quarter  Force, 
Motion, and 
Energy  Force, Motion, 
and Energy  Force, 
Motion, and 
Energy  Force, 
Motion, and 
Energy  Force, Motion, 
and Energy  Earth and 
Space Science  Life Science  Science of 
Material s 
Fourth 
Quarter  Earth and 
Space  Earth and 
Space  Earth and 
Space  Earth and 
Space  Earth and 
Space Science  Force, Motion, 
and Energy  Science of 
Material s Life Science  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 38 
 SCIENCE CURRICULUM GUIDE  
GRADE 4 FIRST QUARTER - Materials  
Content  Content Standards  
Learners learn that:  Learning Competency  
The learners … 
1. Science inventions  
2. Materials and their 
uses 
3. Gathering scientific 
information  1. Science inventions have 
brought about major 
changes to our daily lives.  
2. Chemical properties of 
materials determine their 
uses.  
3. Communication skills and 
open mindedness are 
needed in solving 
environmental issues.  1. use information from secondary sources to identify a famous Filipino and/or 
foreign scientist and their invention/s;  
2. use information from the home or the local community to identify a science 
invention and explain its impact on their everyday life;  
3. describe the chemical properties of materials, such as they can be burnt, react 
with other materials, or are degradable or biodegradable;  
4. describe changes in properties of materials when exposed to certain changes in 
temperature, such as changes when wood or coal are burned;  
5. demonstrate ways to minimize harmful changes in materials, such as restriction 
of burning of waste materials, and care in handling reactive materials;  
6. identify issues and concerns in the local community and how they could be 
addressed by science, such as the treatment of waste; and  
7. apply science process skills and attitudes in conducting a guided survey about 
environmental issues and concerns including grouping and classifying, 
communicating, and open mindedness.  
Performance Standard  
By the end of the Quarter, learners  describe chemical properties of materials and changes to them. They demonstrate an understanding that 
science processes can solve everyday problems and use creativity and determination to provide examples. They exhibit objectiv ity and open -
mindedness in g athering information related to environmental issues and concerns in the community.  
Suggested Performance Task/s  
A. Create a simple model, illustration or write a story about a favorite science invention that you use in everyday life.  
B. Plan and produce a sample of useful fertilizer from household waste.  
 
Page 25 of 38 
  
GRADE 4 SECOND QUARTER - Living Things  
Content  Content Standards  
Learners learn that:  Learning Competency  
The learners … 
1. Systems in plants 
and animals  
2. Plants and animals 
and their habitats  
3. Life cycles of 
animals  
4. Animals and the 
food they eat  
5. Food chains  1. Animals and plants have 
systems that function to 
keep them alive.  
2. Animals and plants live in 
habitats that meet their 
basic needs.  
3. Animals have life cycles 
that include development 
and reproduction.  
4. Animals can be grouped 
according to the food that 
they eat.  
5. Food chains show a series 
of living things that 
depend on each other for 
food. 
6. Using drawings, tables, 
and flowcharts is an 
important skill in learning 
science concepts and in 
learning about science 
processes.  1. describe in simple terms how the following human body systems work: muscular, 
skeletal, digestive, circulatory, and respiratory;  
2. observe the root and shoot system in plants and describe why they are 
important;  
3. use a drawing or diagram to classify some Philippine animals and plants, based 
on their habitat: some live on land (terrestrial), live in water (aquatic) or fly in the 
air (aerial);  
4. make a list or draw up a table with examples of animals and plants in a 
particular habitat, such as a garden, rice field, seashore, and mangrove swamp;  
5. use flow charts to compare the different stages in the life cycle of animals, such 
as a butterfly, frog, chicken, and human;  
6. use information from secondary sources to group animals according to the food 
they eat. Some are:  
a. plant eaters (herbivores),  
b. meat eaters (carnivores), and  
c. plant and meat -eaters (omnivores); and  
7. draw a simple food chain using living things from the Philippines and label them 
as herbivores, carnivores, and omnivores.  
Performance Standard  
By the end of the Quarter, learners  identify that plants and animals have systems whose function is to keep them alive. They observe, 
describe, and create representations to show how living things interact with their habitat, survive, and reproduce in specifi c environments. 
They use flowcha rts to show the feeding relationship among different organisms within a given environment.  
Suggested Performance Task  
Create a diorama, terrarium, or an aquarium to illustrate how some plants or animals live on land or in water.  
Page 26 of 38 
  
GRADE 4 THIRD QUARTER - Force, Motion, and Energy  
Content  
 Content Standards  
The learners learn that:  Learning Competencies  
The learners … 
1. Forces and 
movement  
2. Observing, 
measuring, and 
predicting  
3. Magnets  
4. Sound, light, and 
heat energy  1. Science processes help in 
observing and predicting 
how things move.  
2. Pushes and pulls can 
change the position and 
shape of objects.  
3. Gathering scientific 
information helps explain 
the behavior of objects 
and materials.  
4. Magnets affect some 
objects and materials 
without touching them.  
5. Energy is present 
whenever there is 
movement, sound, light, 
or heat.  1. participate in guided activities to discover and predict how rigid and soft objects 
can be moved and/or changed in shape;  
2. measure accurately the distance and time when things move using simple 
equipment;  
3. identify that how far an object moves in a given time is called speed;  
4. construct and label simple graphs of different speeds including stationary and 
uniform speeds, both fast and slow;  
5. participate in guided activities to demonstrate that pushes and pulls can be used 
to change the speed and direction of an object including making it go faster, turn 
it to a different direction, slow it down, and stop it;  
6. demonstrate through guided activities that pushes and pulls can be used to 
change the speed and direction of an object;  
7. determine how forces can change the shape of objects such as when they are 
pushed, pulled, stretched, bent, twisted, or squeezed;  
8. carry out guided investigations to identify the properties of magnets, including 
how they affect other magnets and objects made of different materials;  
9. identify examples of how objects can affect other objects even when they are not 
in contact with each other, such as magnets attracting other objects, light from 
the sun affecting our eyes, and skin, and loud noises hurting our ears;  
10. identify that energy is something that can cause change including light, sound, 
and heat energy; and  
11. observe and identify sources and uses of light, sound, and heat energy at school, 
at home and in the local community.  
Performance Standard  
By the end of the Quarter, learners use simple equipment and processes to measure and record data related to movement and describe and 
predict the way things around them move using more scientifically technical language and concepts, such as speed and force. T hey 
Page 27 of 38 
 demonstrate an understanding that science processes are used to gain deeper understanding about forces and energy that cannot  be seen 
directly, including the properties of magnet, light, sound, and heat. Learners apply their observation skills and objectiv ity to identify where 
energy is evident in their local communities and how it is used by people.  
Suggested Performance Tasks  
A. Develop a poster to show some sources and uses of heat energy in your home or neighborhood.  
B. Collaborate in a small group to develop a safety guide that explains how to stay safe around intense light and sound. Include information 
on ways to protect eyes and ears and explain how the suggested ways could provide protection.  
 
 
GRADE 4 FOURTH QUARTER - Earth and Space  
Content  Content Standards  
The learners learn that:  Learning Competencies  
The learners … 
1. Soils 
2. Characteristics of 
weather  
3. Characteristics of 
the Sun  1. Soil and water resources 
are needed by plants and 
animals to live and grow.  
2. Characteristics of the 
weather can be observed 
and measured.  
3. The Sun is a ball of hot 
gases about 100 times the 
size of Earth, which 
radiates light energy 
needed by living things.  1. participate in guided activities using simple equipment to compare different types 
of soil including sandy, clay, silt, and loam, including comparing the ability of the 
soils to hold water;  
2. recognize that water is one of the basic needs of plants and animals;  
3. participate in a guided investigation to identify the effect of different types of soil 
on the growth of plants;  
4. identify some of the basic characteristics used to describe the weather, such as 
air temperature, air pressure, wind speed, wind direction, humidity, rain, and 
cloud cover;  
5. use weather instruments to measure and record some of the characteristics of 
weather during a school day;  
6. examine a local weather chart to make simple interpretations about the local 
weather and how it might change and describe and practice safety precautions to 
use during poor or extreme weather conditions;  
7. describe some of the overall characteristics of the Sun, such as its composition, 
its size, and the main energy it radiates;  
8. describe the changes in the direction and length of shadows from a shadow stick 
and use the information to infer why the Sun changes position during a day; and  
Page 28 of 38 
 9. make suggestions about the importance of the Sun to living things for a group or 
class discussion and confirm and record ideas by referring to trustworthy 
secondary sources of information.  
Performance Standard  
By the end of the Quarter, learners use simple equipment to identify how types of soil hold water to support the growth of plants. They use 
instruments and secondary sources to measure and describe the characteristics of weather and use the information to make predictions 
about weather patterns in their local area. They demonstrate appreciation for the dangers of extreme weather events and use s afe practice to 
protect themselves if they are caught in bad weather. Learners use personal observations and reliable secondary information sources to 
describe the Sun and explain its importance to life on Earth.  
Suggested Performance Task  
Construct a sundial that can indicate the time of the day.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 38 
 Grade 7 FIRST QUARTER - Science of Materials  
Content  Content Standards  
Learners learn that:  Learning Competency  
The learners … 
1. Use of models  
2. The Particle model 
and changes of 
state 
3. Planning, following, 
and recording 
scientific 
investigations  
4. Solutions, 
solubility, and 
concentration  1. Scientists use models to 
explain phenomena.  
2. The particle model 
explains the properties of 
solids, liquids, and gases 
and the processes 
involved in changes of 
state.  
3. Diagrams and flowcharts 
are very useful in 
demonstrating and 
explaining the motion and 
arrangement of particles 
during changes of state.  
4. There are specific 
processes for planning, 
conducting, and recording 
scientific investigations.  
5. The properties of 
solutions such as 
solubility and reaction to 
litmus determine their 
use. 1. recognize that scientists use models to explain phenomena that cannot be easily 
seen or detected;  
2. describe the Particle Model of Matter as “All matter is made up of tiny particles 
with each pure substance having its own kind of particles.”;  
3. describe that particles are constantly in motion, have spaces between them, 
attract each other, and move faster as the temperature increases (or with the 
addition of heat);  
4. use diagrams and illustrations to describe the arrangement, spacing, and relative 
motion of the particles in each of the three states (phases) of matter;  
5. explain the changes of state in terms of particle arrangement and energy 
changes:  
a. solid → liquid → vapor, and  
b. vapor → liquid → solid;  
6. follow appropriate steps of a scientific investigation which includes:  
a. Aim or problem,  
b. Materials and equipment,  
c. Method or procedures,  
d. Results including data, and  
e. Conclusion.  
7. make accurate measurements using standard units for physical quantities and 
organize the collected data when carrying out a scientific investigation;  
8. identify the role of the solute and solvent in a solution;  
9. express quantitatively the amount of solute present in a given volume of solvent;  
10. demonstrate how different factors affect the solubility of a solute in a given 
solvent, such as heat;  
11. identify solutions, which can be found at home and in school and that react with 
litmus indicator, as acids, bases, and salts; and  
12.  demonstrate proper use and handling of science equipment.  
Page 30 of 38 
 Performance Standard  
By the end of the Quarter, learners  recognize that scientists use models  to describe the particle model of matter. They use diagrams and 
illustrations to explain the motion and arrangement of particles during changes of state. They demonstrate an understanding o f the role of 
solute and solvent in solutions and the factors that af fect solubility. They demonstrate skills to plan and conduct a scientific investigation 
making accurate measurements and using standard units.  
Suggested Performance Task  
Design and carry out an investigation to determine the amount of salt in a sample of seawater.  
 
 
GRADE 7 SECOND QUARTER - Life Science  
Content  Content Standards  
Learners learn that:  Learning Competency  
The learners … 
1. Science equipment: 
the compound 
microscope  
2. Plant and animal 
cells 
3. Cellular 
reproduction  
4. Levels of biological 
organization  
5. Trophic levels and 
the transfer of 
energy  
 
 
 1. Familiarity and proper 
use of a compound 
microscope are essential 
to observe cells.  
2. The organelles of plant 
and animal cells can be 
identified using a 
compound microscope.  
3. Cells are the basic unit of 
life and mitosis, and 
meiosis are the basic 
forms of cell division.  
4. Fertilization occurs when 
a male reproductive cell 
fuses with a female 
reproductive cell.  1. identify the parts and functions, and demonstrate proper handling and storing of 
a compound microscope;  
2. use proper techniques in observing and identifying the parts of a cell with a 
microscope such as the cell membrane, nucleus, cytoplasm, mitochondria, 
chloroplasts, and ribosomes;  
3. recognize that some organisms consist of a single cell (unicellular) like in bacteria 
and some consist of many cells (multicellular) like in a human;  
4. differentiate plant and animal cells based on their organelles;  
5. recognize that cells reproduce through two types of cell division, mitosis and 
meiosis, and describe mitosis as cell division for growth and repair;  
6. explain that genetic information is passed on to offspring from both parents by 
the process of meiosis and fertilization;  
7. differentiate sexual from asexual reproduction in terms of: a) number of parents 
involved, and b) similarities of offspring to parents;  
8. use a labelled diagram to describe the connections between the levels of 
biological organization to one another from cells to the biosphere;  
Page 31 of 38 
  5. Sexual reproduction is 
the basis of heredity.  
6. The level of biological 
organization provides a 
simple way of connecting 
the simplest part of the 
living world to the most 
complex.  
7. Identifying trophic levels 
helps understand the 
transfer of energy from 
one organism to another 
as shown in a food 
pyramid.  9. describe the trophic levels of an organism as levels of energy in a food pyramid; 
and 
10. use examples of food pyramids to describe the transfer of energy between 
organisms from one trophic level to another.  
Performance Standard  
By the end of the Quarter, learners demonstrate understanding of the parts and function of a compound microscope and use this to identify 
cell structure. They recognize that the cell is the basic unit of life and that some organisms are unicellular and some are m ulticellular. They 
explain that there are two types of cell division, and that reproduction can occur through sexual or asexual processes. They u se diagrams to 
make connections between organisms and their environment at various levels of organization. They explain the process  of energy transfer 
through trophic levels in food chains.  
Suggested Performance Task  
Create a visual representation, such as poster, model, or e -poster, explaining the trophic level in a chosen ecosystem.  
 
 
GRADE 7 THIRD QUARTER - Force, Motion, and Energy  
Content  Content Standards  
The learners learn that:  Learning Competencies  
The learners … 
Page 32 of 38 
 1. Balanced and 
unbalanced forces  
2. Motion: 
displacement and 
velocity  
3. Distance -Time 
graphs  
4. Identifying and 
controlling 
variables  
5. Heat transfer  1. Scientists and engineers 
analyze forces to predict 
their effects on 
movement.  
2. Vectors differentiate the 
concepts of speed and 
velocity.  
3. Graphing motion provides 
more accurate predictions 
about speed and velocity.  
4. The particle model 
explains natural systems 
and processes.  
5. Scientists and engineers 
conduct innovative 
research to find solutions 
to the current global 
energy crisis by seeking 
renewable energy 
solutions.  1. identify that forces act between objects and can be measured.  
2. identify and describe everyday situations that demonstrate:  
a. balanced forces such as a box resting on an inclined plane, a man 
standing still, or an object moving with constant velocity;  
b. unbalanced forces, such as freely falling fruit or an accelerating car;  
3. draw a free -body diagram to represent the relative magnitude and direction of the 
forces involving balanced and unbalanced forces;  
4. identify that when forces are not balanced, they can cause changes in the 
object’s speed or direction of motion;  
5. explain the difference between distance and displacement in everyday situations 
in relation to a reference point;  
6. distinguish between speed and velocity using the concept of vectors;  
7. describe uniform velocity and represent it using distance -time graphs;  
8. explain the difference between heat and temperature;  
9. identify advantageous and disadvantageous examples of conduction, convection, 
and radiation;  
10. explain in terms of the particle model the processes underlying convection and 
conduction of heat energy; and  
11. gather information from secondary sources to identify and describe examples of 
innovative devices that can be used to transform heat energy into electrical 
energy.  
Performance Standard  
By the end of the Quarter, learners  employ scientific techniques, concepts, and models to investigate forces and motion and represent their 
understanding using scientific language, force diagrams, and distance -time graphs. They use their curiosity, knowledge and understanding, 
and skills to  propose solutions to problems related to motion and energy. They explore how modern technologies might be used to overcome 
current global energy concerns.  
Suggested Performance Task  
Develop a 2 -4 page  brochure for parents or leaders in your community to inform them about modern technologies that can be used 
sustainably to transform heat into electricity in the local community.  
Page 33 of 38 
  
 
GRADE 7 FOURTH QUARTER - Earth and Space Science  
Content  Content Standards  
The learners learn that:  Learning Competencies  
The learners … 
1. System models  
2. Earthquakes  
3. The Sun’s 
influence on Earth  1. Rapid movements along 
normal, reverse or strike -
slip faults cause 
earthquakes.  
2. The damage or effects on 
communities depend on 
the magnitude of and 
distance from an 
earthquake.  
3. Sunlight is the Earth’s 
external source of energy.  
4. Solar energy influences 
the atmosphere and 
weather patterns.  
5. The revolution, rotation, 
and the tilt of the Earth 
explain the patterns of 
day and night and the 
seasons.  1. classify geological faults according to the angle of the fault plane and direction 
of slip;  
2. use models or illustrations to explain how movements along faults generate 
earthquakes and identify and explain which types of faults are most likely to 
occur in the Philippines and explain why;  
3. describe how the effects of earthquakes on communities depend on their 
magnitude;  
4. use the PHIVOLCS FaultFinder or other reliable information source to identify 
where the nearest fault system is located from their community and assess the 
risk of earthquakes to their local community;  
5. make models of fault scenarios to illustrate:  
a. the epicenter of an earthquake from its focus,  
b. the intensity of an earthquake from its magnitude, and  
c. how underwater earthquakes may or may not generate tsunamis;  
6. refer to the local disaster readiness plans to demonstrate what to do during and 
after an earthquake;  
7. explain how earthquakes result in tsunamis that devastate shoreline 
communities;  
8. describe procedures that the authorities have in place to alert communities of 
pending tsunamis and what procedures can be implemented should a tsunami 
impact a community;  
9. explain how energy from the Sun interacts with the atmosphere;  
10. make a physical model or use drawings to demonstrate how the tilt of the Earth 
relative to its orbit around the Sun affects the intensity of sunlight absorbed by 
different areas of Earth over a year;  
11. explain, using models, how the tilt of the Earth affects the changes in the length 
of daytime at different times of the year; and  
Page 34 of 38 
 12. explain how solar energy contributes to the occurrence of land and sea breezes, 
monsoons, and the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ).  
Performance Standard  
By the end of the Quarter, learners appreciate the value of using systems to analyze and explain natural phenomena and demonstrate their 
understanding in explaining the dynamics of faults and earthquakes. They are confident in identifying and assessing the earth quake risk for 
their local com munities using authentic and reliable secondary data. They use the country’s disaster awareness and risk reduction 
management plans to identify and explain to others what to do in the event of an earthquake. Learners explain the cause and e ffects of 
second ary impacts that some coastal communities may experience should a tsunami be produced by either local or distant earthquake 
activity. Learners use reliable scientific information to identify and explain how solar energy influences the atmosphere and weather systems 
of the Earth and use such information to appreciate and explain the dominant processes that influence the climate of the Phil ippines.  
Suggested Performance Tasks  
A. Design, test, and evaluate a model house that can withstand a model earthquake.  
B. Design, test, and evaluate a model of an innovative house that can adapt to the different weather conditions in the countr y. 
 
 
GLOSSARY  
 
The curriculum organizers described below are used together to form the curriculum description in the Grades 3 to 10 Science Curriculum 
Guide. The definitions within this section are drawn from DepEd Order No. 8, s. 2015 and DepEd Order No. 21, s. 2019.  
1)        Standard  – In its broadest sense, it is something against which other things can be compared to for the purpose of determining 
accuracy, estimating quantity or judging quality. It is a stated expectation of what one should know and be able to do.  
2)        Key Stage  – This refers to stages in the K to 12 Program reflecting distinct developmental milestones. These are Key Stage 1 
(Kindergarten – Grade 3), Key Stage 2 (Grades 4 – 6), Key Stage 3 (Grades 7 – 10), and Key Stage 4 (Grades 11 and 12).  
3)        Key Stage Standard  – This shows the level or quality of proficiency that the learner is able to demonstrate in each key stage after 
learning a particular area in relation to the core learning area standard . 
4)  Grade Level Standard  – This shows the level or quality of proficiency that the learner is able to demonstrate in each Grade after 
learning a particular area in relation to the core learning area standard . 
Page 35 of 38 
 5)  Content Domain  – This is a particular strand or domain of the curriculum in which the scope and sequence of a set of related 
topics and skills are covered.  
6)  Content Standard  – The content standards identify and set the essential knowledge and understanding intended to be learned. 
They cover a specified scope of sequential topics within each learning strand, domain, theme, or component. Content standards  answer 
the question, “ What should the learners know?”  
7)        Learning Competency  – This refers to a specific skill performed with varying degrees of independence. It has different levels of 
difficulty and performance levels. It also refers to the ability to perform activities according to the standards expected by  drawing from 
one’s k nowledge, skills, and attitudes.  
8)     Performance Standard  – The performance standards describe the abilities and skills that learners are expected to demonstrate in 
relation to the content standards and the integration of 21st century skills. The integration of knowledge, understanding, and skills is 
expressed through creation, innovation, and adding value to products/performance during independent work or in collaboration with 
others.  
 
REFERENCES:  
A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas (2012).  
American Association for the Advancement of Science. The Nature of Science. 2009 
http://www.project2061.org/publications/bsl/online/index.php?chapter=1  
Archer, A., & Hughes, C. (2011). Explicit Instruction: Effective and Efficient Teaching. NY: Guilford Publications.  
Athuman, J. J. (2017). Comparing the effectiveness of an inquiry -based approach to that of conventional style of teaching in the development of 
students’ science process skills.  
 Bandura, A. (1986) Social foundations of thought and action: a social cognitive theory., Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice -Hall. 
Bernardo, A. B. I. (2021). Socioeconomic status moderates the relationship between growth mindset and learning in mathematics  and science: 
Evidence from PISA 2018 Philippine data. International Journal of School & Educational Psychology, 9(2), 208 –222. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/21683603.2020.1832635  
Bruner, J. (1964). The course of cognitive growth. Retrieved from https://www.uky.edu/~gmswan3/544/Bruner_1964_CoCG.pdf  
Page 36 of 38 
 Committee on a Conceptual Framework for New K -12 Science Education Standards; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 
2012. A Framework for K -12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas. Washington, DC: The Nat ional Academies 
Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/13165.  
Charles, R. (2005) Big Ideas and Understandings as the Foundation for Elementary and Middle School Mathematics. NCSM Journal.  Vol. 7 No. 
3, pp 9 -24 https://thelearningexchange.ca/wp -content/uploads/2011/10/BigIdeas_NCSM_Spr05v7.pdf  accessed April 27, 2021  
Department of Education (2015) DepEd Order No. 8, s. 2015, Interim Guidelines for Assessment and Grading in Light of the Basi c Education 
Learning Continuity Plan. Retrieved from https://www.deped.gov.ph/wp -content/uploads/2020/10/DO_s2020_031.pdf . 
Department of Education (2020) DepEd Order No. 31, s. 2020, Policy Guidelines on Classroom Assessment for the K to 12 Basic E ducation 
Program. Retrieved from https://www.deped.gov.ph/wp -content/uploads/2015/04/DO_s2015_08.pdf . 
Department of Education (2019) DepEd Order No. 21, s. 2019,” Policy Guidelines on the K to 12 basic Education Program”  
Department of Education (2016) Department of Education, K to 12 Science Curriculum Guide. Retrieved from https://www.deped.gov.ph/wp -
content/uploads/2019/01/Science -CG_with -tagged -sci-equipment_revised.pdf . 
Department of Education (2018) DepEd Order No. 31, series 2018 (DO 31), Policy Guidelines on the Implementation of the Compre hensive 
Sexuality Education (CSE). Retrieved from Comprehensive Sexuality Education: Developing responsible youth vs rising risks | Department of 
Education (deped.gov.ph)  
Department of Education (2018) On fighting against climate change: Imuseños unite through green schools | Department of Education 
(deped.gov.ph)  
Duch, B. J., Groh, S. E, & Allen, D. E. (Eds.). (2001). The power of problem -based learning. Sterling, VA: Stylus.  
Gutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice. Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19 –25. 
https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X032005019  
Harlen, W. (Ed.) et al. (2015). Working with big ideas of science education. Trieste, Italy: Science Education Programme of I AP. 
Implementing Rules and Regulations of RA 10533, “The Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013”  
International Bureau of Education – Scientific Literacy http://www.ibe.unesco.org/en/glossary -curriculum -terminology/s/scientific -
literacy#:~:text=Within%20the%20framework%20of%20the,evidence%2Dbased%20conclusions%20about%20science%2D  
 
Page 37 of 38 
 Joymie R. Orbe Allen A. Espinosa Janir T. Datukan; Teaching Chemistry in a Spiral Progression Approach: Lessons from Science Teachers in the 
Philippines  
Laal, Marjan & Laal, Mozhgan. (2012). Collaborative learning: What is it?. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences. 
10.1016/j.sbspro.2011.12.092.  
Liu, C. H., & Matthews, R. (2006). Vygotsky’s philosophy: Constructivism and its criticisms examined. International Education  Journal, 6(3), 
386–399. 
McBride, B. B., C. A. Brewer, A. R. Berkowitz, and W. T. Borrie. (2013). Environmental literacy, ecological literacy, ecolite racy: What do we 
mean and how did we get here? Ecosphere 4(5):67. http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/ES13 -00075.1  
Montenegro, E., & Jankowski, N. A. (2017). Equity and assessment: Moving towards culturally responsive assessment. Occasional  Paper, 29.  
Mortimore, Peter (1999). Understanding Pedagogy: And Its Impact on Learning. Paul Chapman Publishing Ltd A SAGE Publications Company 6 
Bonhill Street London EC2A 4PU  
Nasir, N. S., Lee, C. D., Pea, R., & McKinney de Royston, M. (2021). Rethinking learning: What the interdisciplinary science tells us. Educational 
Researcher, 50(8), 557 –565. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X211047251  
National Assessment and Governing Board https://www.nagb.gov/naep -frameworks/technology -and-engineering -literacy/2014 -technology -
framework/toc/ch_0/technology_literacy.html  
National Academies of Science and Engineering https://www.nap.edu/read/4962/chapter/4#22  
 National Assessment Governing Board U.S. Department Of Education Technology & Engineering Literacy. Framework The 2018 Nation al 
Assessment Of Educational Progress.  
https://www.nagb.gov/content/dam/nagb/en/documents/publications/frameworks/technology/2018 -technology -framework.pdf    
 Panizzon D, Pegg J, Arthur D, and McCloughan G. (2021) Designing a developmental progression to assess students’ conceptual understandings 
by focusing on the language demands in Science ; University of New England, Australia. Published in the Australian Journal of Education . 
Piaget, J, (1950). The Psychology of Intelligence. New York: Routledge.  
PISA; 10-How-PISA-D-measures -science -literacy.pdf (oecd.org)  
Pritchard, Alan & Woollard, John (2010) Psychology for the classroom: constructivism and social learning. Routledge 270 Madison Avenue, New 
York, NY 10016  
Page 38 of 38 
 Ravitch, Diane. (2007). EdSpeak: A Glossary of Education Terms, Phrases, Buzzwords, and Jargon. Virginia: Alexandria Associat ion for 
Supervision and Curriculum and Development.  
 Shepard, L. A. (2019). Classroom assessment to support teaching and learning. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political  and Social 
Science, 683(1), 183 -200. 
 Spinelli, C. G. (2008). Addressing the issue of cultural and linguistic diversity and assessment: Informal evaluation measure s for English 
language learners. Reading & writing quarterly, 24(1), 101 -118. 
SEAMEO Basic Education Standards (SEA -BES) (2017): Common Core Regional Learning Standards (CCRLS) in Mathematics and Science; 
Editors: Dominador Dizon Mangao, Nur Jahan Ahmad, Masami Isoda.  
Suchman, J.R. (1964). The Illinois studies in inquiry training. Journal of Research in Science Teaching 2:230 –232. 
 Surif , J., Ibrahim, N. H., Alwi, A. M., Loganathan, P., & Serman, N. S. (2019, December). Effect of Inductive Teaching Method To I mprove Science 
Process Skills In Electrochemistry. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Engineering, Technology and Education ( TALE) (pp. 1 -5). IEEE.  
Vygotsky, L.S. 1978. Mind in society: The Development of Higher Mental Processes. Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.  
World Economic Forum, Defining Education 4.0: A Taxonomy for the Future of Learning; 2023.  
 
 
         
