 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MATATAG K TO 10 CURRICULUM   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  4  
Lesson Exemplar             
for Science  
for Science
 
Lesson  
8  
Quarter 1  
Lesson 1  Quarter 1  
 
 
  
Lesson Exemplar for Science 4  
Quarter  1: Lesson 8 ( Week 8) 
S.Y. 2024 -2025  
 
 This material is intended exclusively for the use of teachers participating in the implementation of the MATATAG K to 10 Curriculum during the School 
Year 2024 -2025. It aims to assist in delivering the curriculum content, standards, and lesson competencies. Any unauthorized reprodu ction, distribution, 
modification, or utilization of this material beyond the designated scope is strictly prohibited and may result in appropriat e legal actions and disciplinary measures.  
 
 Borrowed content included in this material are owned by their res pective copyright holders. Every effort has been made to locate and obtain permission 
to use these materials from their respective copyright owners. The publisher and development team do not represent nor claim ownership over them.  
 
 
 
Every care has been taken to ensure the accuracy of the information provided in this material. For inquiries or feedback, please write or call the Office 
of the Director of the Bureau of Learning Resources via telephone numbers (02) 8634 -1072 and 8631 -6922 or by email at blr.od@deped.gov.ph.Development Team  
Writer:  
• Leizel A. Concepcion (Mariano Marcos State University)  
 
Validator:  
• Diana Lou E. Sipalay (Caloocan High School)  
 
Management Team  
Philippine Normal University                                                                                                  
Research Institute  for Teacher Quality                                                                                 
SiMERR Nati onal Research Centre  
 
 
1 
 SCIENCE (CHEMISTRY) / QUARTER 1 / GRADE 4  
 
I. CURRICULUM CONTENT, STANDARDS, AND LESSON COMPETENCIES       
A. Content 
Standards  Learners learn that:  
1. Science inventions have brought about major changes to our daily lives.  
2. Chemical properties of materials determine their uses.  
3. Communication skil ls and open mindedness are needed in solving environmental issues.  
B. Performance 
Standards  By the end of the Quarter, learners describe chemical properties of materials and change them. They demonstrate an 
understanding that science processes can solve everyday problems and use creativity and determination to provide 
examples. They exhibit objectivity and open -mindedness in gathering information related to environmental issues and 
concerns in the community.  
C. Learning 
Competencies  
and Objectives
  Learning Competency:  The learners apply science process skills and attitudes in conducting a guided survey about 
environmental issues and concerns including grouping and classifying, communicating, and open mindedness.  
 
Lesson Objectives:  
The l earners will be able to:  
a. give attention to the environmental problems that they could observe in their locality; and  
b. use science process skills and attitudes in conducting survey about local environmental issues and concerns.  
 
D. Content  1. Science inventions  
2. Materials and their uses  
3. Gathering scientific information  
E. Integration  Environmental Awareness  
Responsible Steward of Nature  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 II. LEARNING RESOURCES  
● INQUIRER.net. (2023, October 9). Majority of Filipinos noticed climate change impacts in 2023, survey shows | INQToday. YouTu be. 
https://youtu.be/NZDUOPyQ0Rs   
● Rubrics Poster Slog an | Poster | Communication Design. (n.d.). Scribd. https://www.scribd.com/document/420004355/Rubrics -
Poster -Slogan   
 
 
III. TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCEDURE  NOTES TO TEACHERS  
A. Activating Prior 
Knowledge  
 DAY 1  
1. Short Review  
The teacher will cut this picture and let the learners form the picture. After 
forming this picture, ask what they can see in the picture.  
 
 
 
Guide Questions:  
1. What can you see in the pictures? Are these real -ife scenarios? Have you seen 
any of this with your own eyes?  
2. In the past lesson, you have learned about using scientific process skills and 
attitudes. How can knowing and developing these s kills and attitude help you 
solve problems like this?  
  
 
In this part, talk about the 
scenarios formed in the puzzle. 
Let the learners describe the 
pictures and share their ideas.  
 
The review task can be 
implemented as a group 
activity, wherein each group 
will receive a different puzzle 
set. The pieces shall be  
assembled as fast as possible, 
and the group representative or 
team captain can then explain 
the picture formed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
3 
 2.  Feedback (Optional)  
 If the answers to the guide 
questions spark debate or 
discussion, continue processing 
the pupils’ answers in this part.  
B. Establishing 
Lesson Purpose  1. Lesson Purpose  
Ask, “Do you observe environmental problems in your locality? This week, we’ll 
talk about the different problems that we observe in our own place  and conduct 
a simple investigation to find out  their causes and their effects to the society. ” 
 
 
2. Unlocking Content Vocabulary  
Before proceeding, the learners need to define the following words which they 
will be encountering in their lesson for this week.  
1. Water pollution  - the release of substances into bodies of water that makes 
water unsafe for human use and disrupts aquatic ecosystems.  
2. Land pollution  - the deposition of solid or liquid waste materials on land or 
underground in a manner that can con taminate the soil and groundwater, 
threaten public health, and cause unsightly conditions and nuisances . 
3. Garbage pollution - pollution caused by improper disposal of garbage which 
inflicts harm to the environment.  
4. Environmental problems  - a state in w hich the order and law of the 
ecosystem are collapsed as the ecological function it originally had is destroyed 
due to the influence of human activities . 
5. Community – a place where group of people leave together sharing with 
common resources  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The teacher may strategize how 
to present this part. She may 
opt to present through a game , 
using pictures, etc.  
 
C. Developing and 
Deepening 
Understanding  1. Explicitation  
Let the learners read this news article (a copy of which is attached to the 
worksheet).   
 
In this part, the teacher must 
have to establish already what 
environmental problems are, 
what may result to when 
garbage  is not properly 
disposed.  
 
4 
  
Guide questions:       
1. What is the news all about?  
2. What is celebrated nationwide as mentioned by the news article?  
3. Why do you think there is a nationwide awareness on waste segregation?  
4. Is managing our waste a challenge to us as a nation?  
5. Does  improper waste disposal lead to another environmental problems? 
Like   what?  
6. How about in your community, do  you have environmental problems, too?  
    
      The teacher will tell the group that on the succeeding days, they will work on a 
simple inves tigation about simple problems that they observe in their place.  
 
  
In this part, it is important that 
the learners’ attention be led to 
the environmental problems 
that they o bserve in their 
locality.   
 
Since our learners are young, 
bringing them to actual places 
during classes might not be 
possible  (However, if possible , to 
bring them in the actual area, 
that would be better). It is 
suggested that the teacher just 
take a video  of the different 
environmental  issues  that they 
can observe in their locality, say 
polluted body of water, 
deforestation that resulted to 
wildfire, air pollution, and other 
possible environmental 
problems that they can observe 
in the locality. If more tha n one 
issue is observed, divide the 
class as to the number of issues 
so each group will focus to a 
certain problem.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5 
 DAY 2 - DAY3 
 
2. Worked Example : “Zoom -In to Nature”  (LAS1 ) 
Tell the learners that they will have a virtual visit to the community where 
environmental problems are evident. Tell them to be serious and pay attention 
because this activity concerns their own place. Before showing the different 
videos, show short video  footage (say a footage on their way to the target place) 
that will help the pupils familiarize themselves with the places that they will 
visit virtually.  
 
Guide questions:  
    1. What environmental problem is shown in the video?  
    2. What caused this problem?  
    3. What the community is doing to address this problem?  
    4. As a grade 4 pupil, how can you help in solving this problem?  
 
3. Lesson Activity  
The teacher will facilitate the interactive discussion. The discussion here 
depends on the observed problem/s in the locality.  
1. What environmental problem is observed in the locality?  
         The observed problem in the locality is the pollution of the river.  
2. What causes water pollution in the river?  
       Garbage was thrown  in the river. Garbage like  plastic wrappers, bottles, 
and dead animals were thrown in the river.   
 3.  Who is responsible f or throwing garbage into the river?  
         The locals and even the picnic goers just throw their garbage in the water.  
  4. What are observed impact or effect of water pollution in the community?  
        The water gives foul odor to the surroundings, the water is already 
stagnant, aquatic animals no longer thrive in the river.  On the second day, let the 
learners watch the videos and 
start working on the activity.  
 
The teacher may also invite 
somebody form the  locality to 
talk about the problem like for 
example the barangay  officials 
in charge of environmental 
issues in the barangay, 
personnel from ENRO, or 
anybody who is knowledgeable 
of the environmental issue. 
When taking pictures of the 
place, inform their parents 
(through group messaging) that 
they should accompany their 
children.  
 
 
For the sake of discussion  and 
providing sample answers , 
assume that the observed 
problem is water pollution.  
 
The discussion should be 
localized depending on the 
observed environmental issue in 
the community.  
 
The teacher can utilize other 
issue and is free to modify the 
sample answers here.  
 
 
 
6 
        Tourists are no longer attracted to visit the place.  
      Swimming is no longer possible because of the dirty water.  
5. What is the community doin g to address the problem?  
      A barangay ordinance was crafted to protect the river, whoever caught 
dumping garbage in the river will be punished.  
     Washing clothes and cars/jeepneys is prohibited.  
     Regular clean -up drive along the riverbank is conducted every weekend.  
D. Making 
Generalizations  DAY 4 
 
1. Learners’ Takeaways  
Fill out the chart below to know if you’ve learned something from our activity 
this week.  
 
                   
 
2. Reflection on Learning  
 
       Reflect on this.  You may write your answer in your notebook.   
The teacher prepares the 
concept map ahead of time, can 
be printed and can be given 
individually or prepare a big 
one to be posted on the board. 
The learners can answer in 
their notebook and put their 
answers in the posted one on 
the board. Either way, the  
teacher lets the learners 
complete the chart. Afterwards, 
s/he will call at least two (2) 
students to explain their 
answer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The teacher can always insert 
reflection in every lesson or 
activity if s/he deems necessary 

 
7 
  
              My Role in Addressing Environmental Problem of My Community  
 not just at the end of the 
lessons.  
 
IV. EVALUATING LEARNING: FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT AND TEACHER’S REFLECTION  NOTES TO TEACHERS  
A. Evaluating 
Learning   
1. Formative Assessment  
 
In a 1/8 sized illustration board, make a poster – slogan showing proper care 
to environment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Refer to the rubric below for scoring.  
  
 
 
Other drawing material can be 
utilized depending on the 
availability in the locality. The 
main point is to master the goal 
of the lesson and see if pupils 
can really empathize with the 
issue at hand.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
8 
  
Adapted from: https://www.scribd.com/document/420004355/Rubrics -Poster -Slogan   
 
2. Homework (Optional)  
Unfinished activities can be brought home.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The teacher may opt to give 
homework if s/he thinks the 
competency is not yet 
mastered.  
B. Teacher’s 
Remarks  
 Note observations on 
any of the following 
areas:  Effective Practices  Problems Encountered   
strategies explored  
   
materials used  
   

 
9 
 learner engagement/ 
interaction    
others    
C. Teacher’s 
Reflection   
  
Reflection guide or prompt can be on:  
 
▪ principles behind the teaching  
What principles and beliefs informed my lesson?  
Why did I teach the lesson the way I did?  
 
▪ students  
What roles did my students play in my lesson?  
What did my students learn? How did they learn?  
 
▪ ways forward  
What could I have done differently?  
What can I explore in the next lesson?  
  
 
