 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MATATAG K TO 10 CURRICULUM   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  4  
Lesson Exemplar             
for Science  
for Science
 
Lesson  
6  
Quarter 1  
Lesson 1  Quarter 1  
 
 
  
Lesson Exemplar for Science 4  
Quarter  1: Lesson 6 ( Week 6) 
S.Y. 2024 -2025  
 
 This material is intended exclusively for the use of teachers participating in the implementation of the MATATAG K to 10 Curriculum during the School 
Year 2024 -2025. It aims to assist in delivering the curriculum content, standards, and lesson competencies. Any unauthorized reprodu ction, distribution, 
modification, or utilization of this material beyond the designated scope is strictly prohibited and may result in appropriat e legal actions and disciplinary measures.  
 
 Borrowed content included in this material are owned by their res pective copyright holders. Every effort has been made to locate and obtain permission 
to use these materials from their respective copyright owners. The publisher and development team do not represent nor claim ownership over them.  
 
 
 
Every care has been taken to ensure the accuracy of the information provided in this material. For inquiries or feedback, please write or call the Office 
of the Director of the Bureau of Learning Resources via telephone numbers (02) 8634 -1072 and 8631 -6922 or by email at blr.od@deped.gov.ph.Development Team  
Writer:  
• Leizel A. Concepcion (Mariano Marcos State University)  
 
Validator:  
• PNU RITQ Development Team  
 
Management Team  
Philippine Normal University                                                                                                  
Research Institute  for Teacher Quality                                                                                 
SiMERR Nati onal Research Centre  
 
 
1 
 SCIENCE (CHEMISTRY) / QUARTER 1 / GRADE 4  
 
I. CURRICULUM CONTENT, STANDARDS, AND LESSON COMPETENCIES       
A. Content 
Standards  Learners learn that:  
 Communication skills and open -mindedness are needed in solving environmental issues.  
B. Performance 
Standards  By the end of the Quarter, learners describe and change the chemical properties of materials. They demonstrate an 
understanding that science processes can solve everyday problems and use creativity and determination to provide 
examples. They exhibit objectivity and open -mindedness in gathering information related to environmental issues and 
concerns in the community.  
C. Learning 
Competenc ies  
and Objectives
  The learners learn the:  
1. identify issues and concerns in the local community and how they could be addressed by science, such as the 
treatment of waste; and  
2. apply science process skills and attitudes in conducting a guided survey about environmental issues and concerns, 
including grouping and classifying, communicating, and open -mindedness.  
D. Content  1. Science inventions  
2. Materials and their uses  
3. Gathering scientific information  
E. Integration  Environmental Awareness  
Care for the environmental  
Food value  
 
II. LEARNING RESOURCES  
● PARAISO | Smokey Mountain. (n.d.). Www.youtube.com. Retrieved May 9, 2024, from https://youtu.be/Q3q_bPiXnOc  
● ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS IN THE PHILIPPINES. (n.d.). Www.youtube.com. Retrieved May 13, 2024, from https://youtu.be/Dru4tp -
AmkE  
● http://deforestationavt.weebly.com/uploads/4/1/6/0/41600955/enviropol.com -what_is_deforestation_1.pdf ) 
● Pollution: Trash that Trashes Your Health - Public Health Series | Academy 4 Social Change. (n.d.). Www.youtube.com. Retrieved May 
13, 2024, from https://youtu.be/cuf99Opoo1s  
 
2 
 ● Food Waste Posters and Infographics. (n.d.). Www.budgeat.app. Retrieved May 13, 2024, from https://www.budgeat.app/food -for-
thought/food -waste -posters -and-infogra phics  
 
 
III. TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCEDURE  NOTES TO TEACHERS  
A. Activating Prior 
Knowledge  
 DAY 1  
1. Short Review  
Let the learners sing “Paraiso” as guided by the downloaded video clip. Tell 
them to list at least three lines from the song describing the environment. 
Refer to the link below for the song.  
 
 
                              Source: https://youtu.be/Q3q_bPiXnOc  
  
       The teacher may ask: What are the lines of the song talking about?  
 
2. Feedback (Optional)  
  
 
Here, the learners may possibly 
give the following lines:  
- No birds dare to fly over 
Paraiso  
- The smoke  that screens 
the air  
- The grass that was never 
there  
Focus the discussion on the 
current situation of the 
environment based on what the 
song is trying to convey.  
B. Establishing 
Lesson Purpose  1. Lesson Purpose  
The teacher may further ask the following questions: Are you bothered by what 
you’ve watched? Do you observe some environmental issues in your own 
community? How do you, especially those in authority, address these issues?  
This week let’s learn more on the pressing environmental issues a nd concerns 
we observe in our place and how we could help in our own little way.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
3 
 2. Unlocking Content Vocabulary  
Look at the picture below. Arrange the letters or words beside each picture to 
name it. Afterward , give 2 sentences to describe what’s shown in each picture.  
 
1.  
  Source: https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/deforestation/   
 
 
2.  
Source: https://umaine.edu/sustainability/wp -
content/uploads/sites/162/2021/04/Treasure_trove_of_wasted_food_sm2.jpg   
 Answers vary. Here, the teacher 
discusses that deforestation, food 
waste, pollution, and improper 
disposal of garbage are the 
present environmental concerns 
in the community.  
 
n o I t a t s e r o f e d  
  d o f o      a s w e t  
 
4 
 3.  
Source: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/environmental -pollution -sivaprakash -pm/  
 
  
4.  
Source: https://medium.com/@modernspatialdivisions/improper -solid-waste -management -in-manila -513224d50b17   
 
C. Developing and 
Deepening 
Understanding  1. Explicitation:  “EcoVideo”  
Watch the video and answer the questions below.  
 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS IN THE PHILIPPINES  
Source: https://youtu.be/Dru4tp -AmkE  For the explication part, the 
class will conduct a short 
discussion, directing the 
learners to focus on the observed 
environmental issues and 
concerns in their own localities.  
The teacher may assign the 
following: What are the observed 
environmental 
conce rns/problems in your 
community?  
 
  o I n t u o l l p  
  e g a b r a g  
 
5 
 Guide questions:  
        1. What are the environmental problems shown in the video?  
2. Describe each environmental problem as shown in the video.  
3. How does each problem affect  the environment?  
After watching, the teac her will facilitate a short discussion about the 
content of the video.  
DAY 2 - 3 
2. Worked Example: “EnviRescue Trip”  
(Work Sheet 1) 
The teacher will prepare 4 stations (or two stations for day 2 and 2 stations for 
day 3 ). Here are the materials to be prepared by the teacher for each station.  
 
Station 1 : Article About Deforestation  
- Enough copies  of the article for each of the members of  the group to read.  
 
Guide Questions:  
1. What is deforestation?  
2. What are the reasons why deforestation happens?  
3. Give simple things that man can do to protect our forests from 
deforestation.  
 
Station 2: Video about Pollution  
             
- TV or LCD or laptop which will be  
used to play the video.  
 
 
                                                           Source: https://youtu.be/cuf99Opoo1s  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Worked Example part, the 
first two environmental issues 
can be discussed on the second 
day, while the other two can be 
discussed on the third day so 
that the learners can focus on 
each problem.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
6 
 Guide Questions:  
1. What is pollution?  
     2. What are the major forms of pollution that harm  our health?  
     3. What are the different causes of pollution?  
            a. air pollution  
            b. water pollution  
            c. land pollution  
      4. What are the effects of pollution on men’s health?  
           
     Station 3: Food Waste  
- Enough copies  of the infographic to be distributed to each member of the 
group.  
 
 
 
Source: https://www.budgeat.app/food -for-
thought/food -waste -posters -and-infographics  
 Source: https://www.budgeat.app/food -for-
thought/food -waste -posters -and-infographics   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
7 
  
  
Source: 
https://www.canva.com/templates/EAFL_iSbKu
4-ivory -red-pink-bold-geometric -climate -impact -
portrait -food-waste -poster/  
 Source: 
https://www.canva.com/p/templates/EAGA4TH
9BJo -green -yellow -bold-illustrative -food-waste -
tips-poster / 
 
     Guide Questions:  
1. What is food waste?  
2. How many percent of the greenhouse gases are from food waste?  
3. What are the easy steps and ways to prevent food waste?  
4. What can you do to avoid food waste?  
 
Station 4: “Shoot those Trash.”  
Visit the school garden where trash is scattered (Purposely throw/scatter 
garbage in the school garden for this activity ahead of time. Just be sure that 
you will prepare the garden without their knowledge)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
8 
 Tell the learners  to identify the different trash found in the garden and 
segregate it using trash cans labeled biodegradable and  non-biodegradable.  
Guide Questions:  
1. What is the trash that you’ve found in the garden?  
2. What did you do with the trash?  
3. How did you cl assify the trash that you’ve picked from the garden?  
4. What should be done with our trash?  
Lesson Activity  
The teacher will facilitate an interactive discussion. But before the discussion, a 
member from each group will present their output/findings in class in class.  
 After the presentation of outputs, the teacher will ask questions to generate 
concepts from the learners. He/she may ask the following questions.  
 
Station 1  
    What is deforestation?  
      - Deforestation is the purpose ful cutting down of trees or clearing of 
forested land.  
      - This is the clearing or thinning of forests by humans.  
 
    What are the reasons why deforestation happens?  
  - Deforestation is due to the following reasons: (1) Agricultural 
expansion; (2) infrastructure expansion like road building; (3) High 
demand for timbre/logs; (4) Fields  for grazing animals; (5) Housing 
purposes.  
 
Station 2  
 
What is pollution?  
       - Pollution is the presence of substances  in the environment that have  
harmful or poisonous effects on one’s health.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
         - Pollution is the introduction of something to the surroundings that 
causes harm to the natural environment.  
      
      What are the major forms of pollution that harm  our health?  
             - The major forms of pollution are air pollution, water pollution, and 
land pollution . 
      
      What are the different causes of pollution?  
            a. air pollution  
                 - Air pollution is due to car exhaust, pollen, smoke from burning and 
from factories, stingy smell from garbage, and even dust.  
            b. water pollution  
             - Water pollution is caused by dumping garbage in bodies of water, oil 
spills , sewage and wastewater, and agricultural and factory waste.  
            c. land pollution  
       Land pollution is caused by industrial waste, agricultural waste, 
improper waste disposal, accidental oil spills , and acid rain.  
 
What are the effects of pollution on men’s health?  
- The toxic chemicals , when absorbed  by the body , can cause damage 
to major organs of the body.  
- Other effects include cancer, respiratory illness, premature birth, 
and other health issues.  
 
Station 3:  
      What is food waste?  
              Food waste is food intended for human consumption that is wasted 
and lost. It includes leftovers from restaurants and households as well 
as raw materials and produce lost in the farming stage, harvesting 
processes, transportation, and storage.  
       How m any percent of the greenhouse gases are from food waste?   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
              - 8% of the global greenhouse gas comes  from food waste.  
        What are the easy steps and ways to prevent food waste?  
              - The following can be followed to prevent food waste: (1) Take an 
inventory of your food stock at home before heading to the store; (2) Plan at least 
a few meals for each week to avoid buying too much food; (3) Learn to save and 
eat leftovers, refrigerat e them; (4) Store food nicely inside the refrigerator so it 
won’t rot easily; and (5) Compost leftovers instead of throwing them away.  
 
4. As a grade 4 pupil , what can you do to avoid food waste?  
        - I only get the amount of food that I can consume. (answers may vary)  
 
Station 4:  
What garbage is scattered in the garden?  
- There are crumpled papers, dried leaves, plastic bottles, food plastic wrappers, 
dried twigs, cans, and many more.  
 What d id you do with the trash?  
 - We picked up the trash , and we classified them.  
How did you classify the trash that you’ve picked from the garden?  
- We classified the garbage as biodegradable and non -biodegradable  
4. What should be done with our trash?  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For Station 4, include in the 
discussion about biodegradable 
and non - biodegradable.  
 
 
Topics about the negative effects 
of deforestation and how to 
address deforestation can be 
integrated into this part.  
 
While the teacher is facilitating 
the activity, she must explain to 
them what is biodegradable and 
non-biodegradable.  
 
Prepare a labeled trashcan so the 
pupils can properly segregate the 
garbage scattered in the school 
garden.  
 
11 
  
 
 In the discussion of the different 
environmental problems, 
integrate the benefits we get 
when we participate in 
addressing these problems. Also, 
ask the learners what they can do 
to address them.  
 
Integrate values  related to 
environmental awareness like 
responsible nature stewardship.  
 
D. Making 
Generalizations  DAY 4  
 
1. Learners’ Takeaways  
Write 2 concepts that you’ve learned about the environmental issues discussed 
today.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
12 
  
 
 
2. Reflection on Learning  
Reflect on the different issues discussed in this lesson. Choose one of the 
discussed issues and give ways in which you can help in addressing this 
problem.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
13 
 IV. EVALUATING LEARNING: FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT AND TEACHER’S REFLECTION  NOTES TO TEACHERS  
A. Evaluating 
Learning  DAY 4  
 
1. Formative Assessment  
 
A. Read and analyze each statement given below. Write TRUE if the statement is 
true, otherwise, write FALSE.  
 
1. Pollution can affect the health of humans.  
2. Pollution only affects air and water resources.  
3. Food waste is only in poor countries.  
4. Food waste contributes to climate change?  
5. Deforestation can destroy the habitat of wildlife .  
6. High demand for logging materials contributes to the cutting down of trees in 
the forest.  
7. Improper waste disposal can contribute to pollution.  
8. Segregating garbage should only be followed in school and at home.  
9. Self -discipline is needed to fully address the different environment al problems.  
10. Caring for the environment is a responsibility only of adult members of 
society . 
 
B. Aside from the four environmental issues discussed in this lesson, identify 
other environmental problems that you observe in your own local ity. You may 
seek the help of your parents. Write your answer on a sheet of paper.  
 
2. Homework (Optional)  
 
Find a buddy for this activity.  
 
Choose 1 of the discussed environmental issues in this lesson. Make a brochure 
to inform people about the problem. Include in the brochure the causes, effects 
on humans and the environment, and possible ways to solve the problems. The 
rubric below guides you as you develop the brochure.  
 Answer Key : 
1. TRUE  
2. FALSE  
3. FALSE  
4. TRUE  
5. TRUE  
6. TRUE  
7. TRUE  
8. FALSE  
9. TRUE  
10. FALSE  
 
14 
  
Source: http://rubistar.4teachers.org/index.php?screen=ShowRubric&rubric_id=1417742&   
B. Teacher’s 
Remarks  
 Note observations on 
any of the following 
areas:  Effective Practices  Problems Encountered   
strategies explored  
   

 
15 
 materials used  
   
learner engagement/ 
interaction    
Others  
   
C. Teacher’s 
Reflection   
  
Reflection guide or prompt can be on:  
 
▪ principles behind the teaching  
What principles and beliefs informed my lesson?  
Why did I teach the lesson the way I did?  
 
▪ students  
What roles did my students play in my lesson?  
What did my students learn? How did they learn?  
 
▪ ways forward  
What could I have done differently?  
What can I explore in the next lesson?  
  
 
