IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MATATAG K TO 10 CURRICULUM  
 4
Quarter 1
Lesson
6
Learning Activity Sheet
 for Science
 
Worksheet for Science Grade 4  
Quarter 1: Lesson 6 (Week 6)  
S.Y 2024 -2025   
  
This material is intended exclusively for the use of teachers participating in the 
implementation of the MATATAG K to 10 Curriculum during the School Year 2024 -2025. It 
aims to assist in delivering the curriculum content, standards, and lesson competencies . Any 
unauthorized reproduction, distribution, modification, or utilization of this material beyond the 
designated scope is strictly prohibited and may result in appropriate legal actions and 
disciplinary measures.  
  
Borrowed content included in this mate rial is owned by their respective copyright 
holders. Every effort has been made to locate and obtain permission to use these materials 
from their respective copyright owners. The publisher and development team do not represent 
nor claim ownership over them .  
  
 
  
Every care has been taken to ensure the accuracy of the information provided in this 
material. For inquiries or feedback, please write or call the Office of the Director of the Bureau 
of Learning Resources via telephone numbers (02) 8634 -1072 and 8631 -6922  or by email at 
blr.od@deped.gov.ph. Development Team  
Writer:  
• Leizel A. Concepcion (Mariano Marcos State University)  
 
Validator:  
• PNU RITQ Development Team  
 
Management Team  
Philippine Normal University                                                                                                  
Research Institute  for Teacher Quality                                                                                 
SiMERR Nati onal Research Centre  
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MATATAG K TO 10 CURRICULUM  
  
  
Science 4 Quarter 1    1 
 LEARNING ACTIVITY SHEET 1  
  
Learning Area:  Science 4  Quarter:  1st  Quarter  
Lesson No.:  6 Date:   
Lesson Title/ Topic:  Issues and concerns in the local 
community and how they could be 
addressed   
Name:    Grade & Section:     
  
I. Activity No.1: “ EnviRescue Trip” (30 min utes) 
 
II. Objective(s):  Identify common environmental issues and concerns in the community 
and tell how they can be addressed . 
                                
 
III. Materials Needed:  Printed and Online Resources  
 
IV. Instructions:    
▪ Work in a group.  
▪ Visit each of the stations prepared by your teacher and do the task/s in each activity,  
▪ Here are the things you should know in each station:  
Station 1:  
    1. Get a copy of the article.  
    2. Answer the guide questions below.  
    3. Read and analyze the article properly.  
 
   Station 2:  
     1. Before watching, read the guide questions. Watch the video carefully.  
     2. Reread the guide questions and watch the video again. List down important ideas 
that you can get from the video.  
      
   Station 3:  
       1. Take hold of the different infographics about food waste.  
       2. Read and analyze the content of each infographic.  
 
   Station 4:  
       1. With your groupmates, leave the room quietly as you go to the school garden.  
       2. Do not destroy the plants in the garden.  
       3. Pick up all the garbage scattered in the garden and segregate them using the 
trashcans located at one corner of the g arden.  
        4. Make sure to collaborate with your groupmates so will be able to segregate the 
trash correctly.  
 
▪ Don’t forget to answer the following guide questions intended for each station.  
 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MATATAG K TO 10 CURRICULUM  
  
  
Science 4 Quarter 1    2 
 Station 1:  
                          1. What is deforestation?  
                          2. What are the reasons why deforestation happens?  
     3. Give simple things that man can do to protect our forests from deforestation.  
 
             Station 2:  
                        1. What is pollution?  
                  2. What are the major forms of pollution that harm our health?  
                   3. What are the different causes of pollution?  
                                        a. air pollution  
                                        b. water pollution  
                                        c. land pollution  
                   4. What are the effects of pollution on men’s health?  
 
                  Station 3:  
                                 1. What is food waste?  
                            2. How many percent of the greenhouse gases are from food waste?  
                            3. What are the easy steps and ways to prevent food waste?  
                            4. What can you do to avoid food waste?  
 
                Station 4:  
                            1. What is the trash that you’ve found in the  garden?  
                              2. What did you do with the trash?  
                              3. How did you classify the trash that you’ve picked from the garden?  
                              4. What should be done with our trash?  
 
V. Synthesis/E xtended Practice/Differentiation (if needed):  
● Observe your community. What other environmental issues/concerns you can 
see? With the help of your parents, list ways in which the community is 
addressing these issues.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MATATAG K TO 10 CURRICULUM  
  
  
Science 4 Quarter 1    3 
 Copy of the Article on Deforestation  
 
DEFORESTATION  
(What is Deforestation? (n.d.). Retrieved May 10, 2024, from 
http://deforestationavt.weebly.com/uploads/4/ 1/6/0/41600955/enviropol.com -what_is_deforestation_1.pdf ) 
 
 
 
 

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MATATAG K TO 10 CURRICULUM  
  
  
Science 4 Quarter 1    4 
  
 
 
   

